Summary
Mitigating the risks of antibiotic resistance requires a horizon scan linking the quality with the quantity of data reported on drivers of antibiotic resistance in humans, arising from the human, animal, and environmental reservoirs. We did a systematic review using a One Health approach to survey the key drivers of antibiotic resistance in humans. Two sets of reviewers selected 565 studies from a total of 2819 titles and abstracts identified in Embase, MEDLINE, and Scopus (2005–18), and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and WHO (One Health data). Study quality was assessed in accordance with Cochrane recommendations. Previous antibiotic exposure, underlying disease, and invasive procedures were the risk factors with most supporting evidence identified from the 88 risk factors retrieved. The odds ratios of antibiotic resistance were primarily reported to be between 2 and 4 for these risk factors when compared with their respective controls or baseline risk groups. Food-related transmission from the animal reservoir and water-related transmission from the environmental reservoir were frequently quantified. Uniformly quantifying relationships between risk factors will help researchers to better understand the process by which antibiotic resistance arises in human infections.

Introduction Antibiotic resistance is a growing, multifaceted health concern that results in increased morbidity and mortality for patients and increased financial costs for health-care systems.1 Antibiotic-resistant bacteria are found in humans, diverse animal hosts, and the environment. Each of these reservoirs contributes to the epidemiology of antibiotic resistance.2–5 Many reviews, meta-analyses, and observational studies have assessed drivers of the emergence and transmission of antibiotic resistance.2,3,6–8 Antibiotic use and failure to apply effective infection prevention and control measures are well established key drivers.9,10 However, given the international focus on reducing antibiotic resistance11 and the increased attention to modelling the risk of the One Health effect on humans (panel 1),4 detailed knowledge of the reservoirs and emerging cross-reservoir risk factors of antibiotic resistance is needed. In particular, we need to broaden our understanding of the natural selection and transmission patterns of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which threaten health-care delivery, particularly for patients undergoing invasive procedures such as surgery or receiving immunosuppressive therapies.1 In an attempt to depict the links between the human, animal, and environmental reservoirs of antimicrobial resistance, a systems map was published by the UK Department of Health as part of the UK’s national antimicrobial resistance strategy.14 However, this map was created using expert opinion rather than literature sources, and the links were not quantified.14 There has been no systematic retrieval or quality assessment of the evidence regarding risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans, nor quantification of these risk factors among major bacterial species across the three reservoirs. A synthesis of evidence is urgently required to aid policy-level decision making, ensuring that strategies to minimise the burden of antibiotic resistance can be appropriately prioritised.
Therefore, we aimed to survey the available evidence on quantified risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans by systematically retrieving and reviewing this evidence and generating an overview of the quality and quantity of the related studies. These data were used to create an upto-date map quantifying the drivers identified in this horizon scan to compliment and extend the UK antimicrobial resistance systems map.14 The key terms used throughout this Review are defined in panel 1.
Panel 1: Study terminology • Antibiotic resistance is defined as acquired or inherent resistance to at least one antibiotic • Community setting includes settings outside of a health-care environment, such as households. The animal and environmental reservoirs are included within this setting • Environmental reservoir includes non-meat-related food (eg, vegetables), soil, or water-related sources • Health-care setting includes hospitals and long-term care facilities • Invasive procedures include procedures carried out in a health-care setting, such as use of indwelling devices (eg, catheterisation or intubation) • Multidrug-resistant bacteria are defined as bacteria with acquired resistance to at least three drugs from different classes of antibiotics12 • Extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing bacteria have been separately coded to multidrug-resistant bacteria (despite being a type of multidrug-resistant bacteria) because there has been a surge of international concern regarding these organism types, and many papers were identified for this group of organisms • One Health is defined as the inter-relationship between the human, animal, and environmental reservoirs, and how these relationships affect antibiotic resistance in humans • Risk factor is used as a proxy term for drivers of antibiotic resistance, in accordance with the WHO adapted definition13 of risk factor: a risk factor is any attribute, characteristic, or exposure of an individual that increases the likelihood of the individual (1) being colonised or infected by antibiotic-resistant bacteria, or (2) transmitting such types of bacteria to another individual or the surrounding environment
Risk factors The 527 primary studies were used to construct a map of antibiotic resistance drivers (figure 3). Links between antibiotic use (293 studies, 56%), health-care contact (279, 53%), or patient clinical history (247, 47%) and antibiotic resistance in humans were most frequently quantified (figure 3). Risk factors related to the community-level factors (103 studies, 20%) and demographics (95, 18%) domains were reported less frequently. Studies focusing on the health-care factors domain were on average of better quality (mean quality score 0·68, SD 0·18) than studies reporting communitylevel factors (0·46, SD 0·18; table). The five domains and their respective risk factors are presented in the appendix, along with the number of studies retrieved and their respective quality scores.
Sub-analysis of outcomes reported across the domains The risk factors identified in the review were reported for various outcomes of antibiotic resistance in humans. Figure 4 describes the types of outcomes and number of studies extracted from each risk domain. Outcomes were infection, colonisation, acquisition, emergence, carriage, indirect transmission, and other. Infection referred to antibiotic-resistant bacteria causing infection. Colonisation meant colonised but not infected by antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Acquisition referred to directly acquiring antibiotic-resistant bacteria, including infection, from another host or the surrounding environment. Emergence referred to determinants, predictors, and factors increasing the prevalence of antibiotic resistance in humans. Carriage included nasal, faecal, and skin carriage. Indirect transmission referred to indirect acquisition routes that facilitate the transfer of antibiotic-resistant bacteria from one host to another host (human to human, or animal to human) or from environment to host (and vice versa); prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria from uncooked or cooked food sources, as well as water sources, was also used as proxies for these routes. The final outcome, other, included combinations of colonisation, infection, and acquisition, or transmission and carriage, or studies that specified the outcome as a risk factor for the resistant organism. Transmission, emergence, or acquisition routes are often difficult to assess clinically, particularly from retrospective studies; these terms were directly elicited from the studies, giving rise to overlap between these outcomes and heterogeneity across their studyspecific definitions. Across all studies, antibiotic resistance-related infections were most frequently reported, followed by colonisation with antibioticresistant bacteria. Gram-negative bacteria were the most frequently assessed resistant bacteria across all outcomes, except for the carriage of antibiotic-resistant bacteria outcome, in which Gram-positive bacteria predominated. In terms of risk domains driving the various outcomes, health-care contact was most frequently reported to  result  in antibiotic resistance-related infections (113 of 170 studies, 66%) or acquisition of antibioticresistant bacteria (54 of 84 studies, 64%), whereas factors related to patient clinical history most often resulted in colonisation with antibiotic-resistant bacteria (62 of 101 studies, 61%). Antibiotic use was reported to result in emergence (40 of 61 studies, 66%), or carriage (31 of 56 studies, 55%) of antibiotic resistance. By contrast, community-level factors were shown to drive indirect routes of transmission across all 45 of the studies retrieved. Studies reporting on infection (mean quality score 0·65, SD 0·2) and colonisation (mean 0·63, SD 0·2) were of better quality, with lower risk of bias, than transmission-related studies (mean 0·45, SD 0·23). Of the meta-analysis studies, the most frequently quantified antibiotic resistance outcomes were infection (15 studies, 39%) and colonisation (8 studies, 21%). Sub-analysis of OR estimates reported from multivariate analyses and meta-analyses To evaluate the strength of the extracted evidence, we did a subanalysis of ORs for independent risk factors reported in studies that did multivariate analyses (ie, meta-analysis results were not included), including only studies that reported complete datasets (ie, number of cases and ORs with significant CIs; see appendix) for the OR ranges elicited from this analysis along with the number of studies and their quality. Among the different risk domains, antibiotic use (OR range 1·04 to 361·18) and community-level factors (1·27 to 591·00) had the widest OR ranges for risk of antibiotic resistance (appendix). We specified 15 different OR ranges and calculated the proportion of studies that reported ORs in each range (figure 5), stratified by two most frequently reported outcomes (infection and colonisation) and by Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. The ORs for antibiotic-resistant bacteria in humans were most commonly reported to be between 2  and 4 for exposure to the various risk domains compared with their respective non-exposed controls or baseline risk groups. The distribution of ORs from the meta-analyses (figure 6) showed that factors from the different risk domains were most commonly associated with ORs between 2 and 3 compared with respective control or baseline risk groups. However, the majority of studies reported ORs of between 1 and 2 for health-care factors, and the reported ORs related to antibiotic use were predominantly spread between 2 and 4. Discussion Understanding the underlying epidemiology of antibiotic resistance is an important step towards the formulation of interventions to control its emergence and transmission in humans. This systematic review showed that studies quantifying drivers of antibiotic resistance evidence from within the human reservoir were most numerous, whereas there is little evidence pertaining to cross-reservoir drivers. The effect of the animal reservoir on humans has been the most frequently studied aspect of cross-reservoir factors. Evidence supporting the environment as a common transmission route to the human reservoir is scarce. Evidence for cross-reservoir drivers comes primarily from cross-sectional and prevalence studies, in which methodological limitations such as selection, misclassification, and confounding biases reduced reliability. Such types of bias are usually avoided within well conducted cohort and case-control studies. We defined five domains of risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans. According to the results from the top three risk factors (based on the frequency and quality of the quantified evidence), underlying disease, antibiotic use, and invasive procedures in health-care settings were the factors with the most supporting evidence. Most case-control and cohort studies collected data on patient characteristics in hospitals, suggesting that retrospectively accessing hospital records to assess potential risk factors is feasible. By contrast, risk factors from the community-level domain were less frequently included in case-control and cohort study protocols, suggesting that either it is less feasible to collect these data or investigators do not feel that such data merit inclusion when designing these studies. This Review highlights three key gaps in our understanding of the drivers of antibiotic resistance in humans. First, few studies have investigated causal relationships among the risk factor domains and reservoirs. Instead, well established risk factors such as previous antibiotic exposure and invasive procedures during health-care contact have been the emphasis of most studies investigating risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans. The scarcity of evidence in other areas, such as cross-reservoir risks, is not necessarily indicative of a low risk, and the numerical load of evidence should be interpreted with caution. Second, local-level factors associated with increased antibiotic resistance in hospital settings are underrepresented in the literature. For example, the effects of scarce resource allocation on staff-to-patient ratio,63 on infection control practices,64 on inter-staff transmission of pathogens, and on frequency of patient isolation65,66 cannot be concluded from the current literature. At the time of the Review, the increased risk of antibiotic resistance in the health-care setting was predominantly reported to be due to the effects of either previous room occupants,67 or hospital environment or health-care worker contamination.68,69 Third, methodologically rigorous studies capturing heterogeneous community-level risk factors are few. There was little quantified evidence on the effect of community conditions (eg, general practitioner contact hours or availability,70 education, income, food source, or household size), or factors such as the potential influence of ethnicity71 on travel patterns or health-related behaviour, and their effects on risk of antibiotic resistance. Based on these gaps, we propose the following suggestions for future research. The risk factor domains framework from this Review could be included within standardised data collection protocols for studies of antibiotic resistance risk factors to ensure inclusion of clinical characteristics as well as community and hospital-specific characteristics to rule out their confounding effects. Repeated quantification and focus on established risks could, in turn, lead to more studies of similar, established risk areas, rather than entirely novel areas. In-depth qualitative research is needed to help justify exploration of underlying factors and raise the profile of certain understudied areas. Thus, to further highlight local-level risk factors, studies could incorporate qualitative techniques, such as surveys and interviews,72 to support the quantified data from hospital patient records from retrospective studies. Given the highly variable outcomes and the variable individual outcome definitions (eg, carriage or acquisition of resistant bacteria) identified from the data extraction (figure 4), there is a need for clarity and uniformity of these definitions across the field of antibiotic resistance to improve granularity and to enhance understanding of the methods of transmission or emergence, which could, in turn, improve the efficacy of interventions targeting antibiotic resistance in humans. Some limitations of this Review should be noted. First, data extraction and quality assessment were done by one reviewer, which might have led to discrepancies in data collection and analysis. All measures were taken to limit any discrepancies by double checking data extractions and doing stress tests when coding the data. We also did not contact the authors of the reviewed studies to clarify the extracted data, which should be considered another limitation. The quality assessment was randomly checked by a second reviewer to minimise any bias. Second, because of the surge of publications related to antibiotic resistance over the past decade, the broad search terms (which did not use drug–microbe combinations as search strings), and the language restriction, this Review will not have identified all risk factor studies across all drug–microbe combinations and settings. However, the meta-analyses search in PubMed, which used drug–microbe combinations from WHO’s antibiotic priority list for the search terms, should minimise the possibility of missed risk factors. Third, the evidence retrieved from studies specific to the human reservoir was of greater quality and quantity than that relating to the other reservoirs. The key risk domains of antibiotic use, health-care factors, and patient clinical history were studied to a greater extent than were the other two domains, possibly because they were easier to study in terms of data availability from health-care records and the minimal resources required to conduct retrospective analyses of such data. Therefore, there is potential publication bias towards retrospective studies that use hospital data to evaluate risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans. Finally, the Review included only studies that provided quantitative evidence on drivers and risks in humans from within the human reservoir and across the other two reservoirs. Because descriptive studies were not included, evidence of risk factors from such studies was not captured, and quantitative and descriptive evidence73 could not be compared. This systematic review provides a reference document with which to assess the state of studies of risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans over the past 10 years, and provides an indication as to the relative importance of risk factors as well as where information is lacking. The added value of this study is that it emphasises the need for researchers to use standardised data collection protocols in observational studies aiming to report on risk factors for antibiotic resistance in humans, to increase the clarity with which risk factors are captured. A simple framework using the risk factor domains established in this Review could enable a better representation of the underlying local-level risks of such resistance in humans by increasing granularity among the established risks being captured, which could improve our understanding of these risks in humans. This framework could also be amended to enable health policy makers and funding bodies to allocate research funding towards setting-specific factors that might contribute to the risk of antibiotic resistance in humans, and in turn effectively prioritise resource allocation. Promoting alternative research agendas aimed at better understanding the underlying risks might alter our understanding of the risks of antibiotic resistance. We hope that research agendas will benefit by moving away from convenient, easy-toproduce studies towards more exploratory studies hypothesising the potential importance of the understudied areas arising from the community, as clearly shown in this Review. These understudied areas could lead to further important factors that influence antibiotic resistance in humans, which might change our understanding of the transmission dynamics of resistance in humans. This Review could be used to prioritise resources in terms of intervention choice and intervention evaluation, as well as to direct further research needs highlighted by related funding initiatives.
