Abstract
The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified the spread of antibiotic resistance as one of the major risks to global public health. An important transfer route into the aquatic environment is the urban water cycle. In this paper the occurrence and transport of antibiotic microbial resistance in the urban water cycle are critically reviewed. The presence of antibiotic resistance in low impacted surface water is being discussed to determine background antibiotic resistance levels, which might serve as a reference for treatment targets in the absence of health-based threshold levels. Different biological, physical and disinfection/oxidation processes employed in wastewater treatment and their efficacy regarding their removal of antibiotic resistant bacteria and antibiotic resistance geness (ARGs) were evaluated. A more efficient removal of antibiotic microbial resistance abundances from wastewater effluents can be achieved by advanced treatment processes, including membrane filtration, ozonation, UV-irradiation or chlorination, to levels typically observed in urban surface water or low impacted surface water.
Introduction In the 20th century, several antibiotics were developed to combat bacterial infections. As a consequence, bacteria responded to antibiotic resistance by adapting to increasing levels of antibiotics in the environment. Today, mankind is faced with a rapidly increasing number of antibiotic-resistant strains (Jenkins and Cooper, 2012; Lee, 2015; Morrill et al., 2015; Gillespie, 2002). The use of antibiotics is the first choice in human and veterinary therapy, aquaculture, as well as life-stock farming. Klein et al. (2018) analyzed the antibiotic consumption expressed in defined daily doses (DDD), in 76 countries from 2000 to 2015 and reported an increase of 65% (21–34.8 billion DDDs). Without major policy changes, global antibiotic consumption is likely going to increase (Klein et al., 2018). However, consumed antibiotics are not completely incorporated but partially metabolized by humans and animals. Between 30 and 90% of the ingested antibiotics to humans and animals are excreted by urine and feces (Du and Liu, 2011). The widely and excessive consumption of antibiotics, the incomplete metabolism of drugs and the partial removal in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are resulting in the ubiquitous occurrence of some of these compounds in the aquatic environment at the nanogram to low microgram per liter concentration range (Alexander et al., 2015; Chow et al., 2015; Kümmerer, 2004). Studies published in the recent past suggest that even low concentrations of these antimicrobial drugs may pose a constant selection pressure on bacterial populations. In order to survive against antibiotics, bacteria generate antibiotic resistance by mutations or by horizontal gene transfer (Salcedo et al., 2015; Gullberg et al., 2011; Chow et al., 2015). Antibiotic microbial resistance (AMR) is carried by antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARBs) and expressed through antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs). ARB and ARGs may find their way into the urban water cycle via wastewater discharge or applications of manure and biosolids and associated unintended run-off from agricultural land. Thus, the urban water cycle is considered an important pathway for distributing antibiotic resistance (Chow et al., 2015). Several recent reviews have highlighted key aspects related to the increasing spread of AMR in the aqueous environment. The reviews of Bouki et al. (2013) and Rizzo et al. (2013) summarized commonly applied methods to determine AMR in wastewater samples and quantify ARB and ARG emissions of conventional WWTP discharges into the aquatic environments. Bouki et al. (2013) described AMR removal efficiencies of different oxidation processes. Furthermore, Rizzo et al. (2013) discussed the effect of advanced treatment processes like sand filtration, adsorption, membrane filtration and advanced oxidation processes. Recent reviews by Umar et al. (2019), Michael-Kordatou et al. (2018) and Yan et al. (2019) also examined the removal of AMR in specific advanced treatment processes such as UV irradiation, chemical advanced oxidation processes (AOP), and bioelectrochemical systems (BES) in wastewater. Reviews by Nnadozie et al. (2017), Krzeminski et al. (2019) and Barancheshme and Munir (2018) discussed the fate of ARB and ARGs by both, conventional and advanced treatment processes. Research studies addressing AMR removal efficiencies of conventional and advanced treatment processes are illustrated according to individually examined ARB and ARGs. The aim of this review paper is to complement existing literature on specific treatment processes with a broader perspective on challenges using analytical techniques, occurrence in different aquatic compartments (WWTP effluents, urban and low impacted surface waters), and a discussion on suitable indicator ARB and ARGs. Firstly, the challenges and limitations of commonly applied methods to determine AMR are presented and discussed as a prerequisite for the assessment of the AMR threat. The different classes of antibiotics and their consumptions (based on data in Germany) are illustrated in order to identify suitable indicator antibiotics and respective ARB and ARGs to assess the risk of AMR. Indicator ARB and ARGs are suggested for AMR monitoring in wastewater treatment and in surface waters. Furthermore, AMR removal efficiencies of conventional wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) and advanced treatment processes are critically reviewed to identify knowledge gaps and potential strategies for AMR mitigation. Furthermore, the impact of AMR affecting surface water qualities are presented based on studies analyzing ARB and ARGs abundances downstream and upstream of discharge points. Subsequently, occurrence of AMR is illustrated for different water bodies. 2. Determination of antibiotic resistance in water samples In order to quantify AMR in water samples, it is necessary to be familiar with the pros and cons of commonly applied culture-based and molecular-based detection methods. For the separation of ARB and ARGs from water samples, membrane filtration with pore sizes of 0.2 or 0.45 μm is commonly applied (EPA, 2002), followed by culture-based methods or molecular based DNA extractions. Using culturebased methods, bacteria recovered on membrane filters are transferred to selective culture media and quantified applying standard procedures (Rizzo et al., 2013). Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of antibiotics to specific bacteria are defined in order to determine whether the analyzed sample contains antibiotic susceptible or antibiotic resistant bacteria (Rodloff et al., 2008). The MIC values are introduced for defined bacteria species (e.g., E. coli), but are not qualified for environmental bacteria since they can rarely grow on culture media. Hence, these methods do not provide any information on ARGs, which might be incorporated by other bacteria. Standardization of culture-based methods enables a simple and cost-effective comparison of results, especially in nutrient poor habitats like drinking water matrices. However, typical disadvantages of culture-based methods include the need for immediate sample processing (typically within 24 h) (Rizzo et al., 2013) and the limitation to predefined bacteria strains and cultivable bacteria on synthetic media (Staley and Konopka, 1985). They also exclude bacteria in a viable but non-culturable (VBNC) state (Exner and Schwartz, 2015) or non-target bacteria that carry the ARG but that do not grow on selective media; both of which can lead to false-negative results. The prevalent molecular-based method for detection of antibiotic resistance genes is the quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) technique on the basis of the nucleic acid amplification. In this method, the bacterial DNA is recovered from total DNA samples and antibiotic resistance genes are amplified according to standardized and commercially available protocols. Predefined primers are used to determine specific bacterial genes. The advantage of the qPCR method is the high specificity and the rapid examination within 24 h and low measurement error of about 10% (Kitchen et al., 2010). The qPCR enables to detect the total abundance of (targeted) ARGs across all bacterial strains, bacteriophages (Quirós et al., 2014), mobile DNA fragments like plasmids, transposons and integrons (Xu et al., 2016; Muziasari et al., 2014) as well as “free” environmental DNA (eDNA). Moreover, the pretreatment of samples with propidium monoazide (PMA) principally enables qPCR analyses to differentiate DNA from living cells versus DNA derived from dead cells, phages, or for instance eDNA fragments (Nocker et al., 2010; Jäger et al., 2018a, 2018b). Thus, potential antibiotic resistance donors of ARGs can be quantified. However, PCR detection alone does not identify the bacteria carrying the specific resistance genes and their relevance to human health. Furthermore, the method is limited to known genes, which renders it difficult to conclude on the overall resistance to a specific antibiotic, if e.g. the resistance can be transferred by alternative resistance genes (e.g., vanA and vanB gene can both independent of each other infer resistance against vancomycin). Therefore, the determination of a single resistance gene might give limited information regarding the real resistance to the specific antibiotic in the analyzed water sample. Here, highly parallel qPCR assays, ChipSeq, microarrays or nextgeneration sequencing surpasses the dilemma but often require considerable expertise and financial resources. Currently, reporting the presence of AMR in water samples is not consistent in the literature. ARB and ARGs are usually reported as total abundance as CFU/mL (ARB) and gene copies/mL (ARGs), but results are often shown as relative abundance. The relative abundance is normalized to either the bioburden measured as all cultivable bacteria, to the measured 16S rRNA gene copies, or to the total amount of DNA (Alexander et al., 2015). Thus, these relative abundances imply errors leading to considerable deviations. For instance, 16S gene copies depend largely on the 16S gene copy numbers in the individual genome (ranging from 1 to 15); the total amount of DNA depends largely on the extraction efficiencies, commercial kit components, impurities, and the amount of eukaryotic and eDNA; cultivatable bacteria are largely biased by the uncultured bacteria and by the VBNCs. Therefore, care must be taken when linking relative abundances to regulatory removal requirements.
3. Occurrence of antibiotic resistance 3.1. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistances of interest After the introduction of the first antibiotic, an ever-increasing number of antibiotics for medical use has been manufactured. The most applied antibiotics and antibiotic classes and their consumptions in veterinary and ambulant human therapy in Germany are summarized in Table 1. The antibiotic consumption in veterinary medicine is presented in tons per annum. The antibiotic consumption in ambulant human therapy is expressed in defined daily doses (DDD). These antibiotics are categorized into narrow and broad spectrum antibiotics, applied against a limited number of specific bacteria and a large group of bacterial infections. The antibiotics of last resort and antibiotics of emergency consider priority antibiotics so that certain drugs can be reserved for human therapy. The World Health Organization (WHO) implemented the antibiotic categorizations “Access” for first and second choice antibiotics and “Watch” and “Reserve” antibiotics for antibiotics of last resort as well as for antibiotics of emergency (WHO, 2017). Broad-spectrum antibiotics are classified as all-purpose antibiotics with high application rates in Germany for veterinary and for human ambulant therapy (Table 1), which can also be detected in WWTPs' influents. For example, Alexander et al. (2015) reported sulfamethoxazole (sulphonamide) concentrations up to 2.8 μg/L in the influent of a WWTP, a compound class that has received a lot of attention in AMR research. Antibiotics of last resort and emergency antibiotics are used in lower quantities and applied basically for exceptional cases when other antibiotics were not effective in therapy. They are predominantly used in clinical human and in veterinary therapy (BVL, 2015). Galvin et al. (2010) demonstrated that hospital wastewater had higher abundance of cephalosporin and quinolone resistance compared to municipal wastewater without hospital wastewater contributions. Rizzo et al. (2013) analyzed imipenem resistance measured as blaVIM genes in wastewater samples of residential areas, hospital, and WWTPs and reported highest abundances in hospital wastewater. Narrow spectrum antibiotics are used in clinical and ambulant human therapy as well as in veterinary therapy (BVL, 2015; DGI, 2013). Since these antibiotics are selected to treat a narrow spectrum of bacterial infections, their consumption and measured antibiotic concentrations are lower compared to broad-spectrum antibiotics (Table 1). For example, Jiang et al. (2014) measured several antibiotics in river water as well as in groundwater and reported that broad spectrum antibiotics like oxytetracycline were abundant in higher concentrations than narrow spectrum antibiotics like trimethoprim. The German Society of Infectiology recommends the prevalent use of narrow-spectrum antibiotics instead of broad-spectrum antibiotics in order to keep the AMR development at a lower level (DGI, 2013). The graphical overview of total ARGs abundances analyzed in the influent and in the effluent of conventional WWTPs is illustrated in Fig. 1. The articles, considered in Fig. 1 were selected based on resistance genes to specific antibiotics. Table 1 provides information regarding different consumption of antibiotics applied in veterinary and ambulant human therapy. The antibiotics with the highest consumptions (e.g., penicillin, tetracycline, sulfonamide, macrolide, beta-lactam antibiotics) as well as one antibiotic with lower consumption that is typical used for clinical therapy (glycopeptide) are evaluated for further investigations. These antibiotics have been the focus of this study in order to quantify if long term antibiotic application and higher consumptions correlate with higher antibiotic resistance abundances in the influent and effluent of conventional WWTPs. In addition, evaluated antibiotics typical used for clinical therapy with lower consumptions should result in lower antibiotic resistance abundances analyzed in influents and effluents of conventional WWTPs. In these papers, different ARGs were analyzed. The following tet genes were considered in Fig. 1: tetA, tetB, tetM, tetC, tetO, tetQ and tetW. The sul gene analyses targeted sul1 and sul2 genes; ermB and ermF genes were summarized in erm gene analyses. blaTEM, blaVIM-1, blaCTX-M-32, blaSHV-34 and blaOXA-58 genes were considered in the bla gene group in Fig. 1. All ARGs analyses were performed using qPCR. The selection of articles was performed using Google Scholar whereas the following keywords were applied: ‘antibiotic resistance’, ‘antibiotic resistance genes’, ‘antibiotic resistant bacteria’ as well as ‘wastewater treatment’, and ‘conventional wastewater treatment plant’. Papers published between 2005 and 2019 have been considered. Data analyses of Fig. 1 confirm consistently highest resistances to broad-spectrum antibiotics tetracycline or sulphonamide antibiotics while others were only detected at much lower abundances,
e.g., resistance to the antibiotic of last resort vancomycin but also the broad-spectrum antibiotic ampicillin. Ampicillin is a representative of the penicillin class. Lower analyzed ampC abundances could be a matter of low ampicillin application compared to other penicillin antibiotics. Furthermore, the beta-lactam group represents antibiotics belonging to broad-spectrum, narrow spectrum antibiotics as well as antibiotics of last resort and antibiotics of emergency having lower concentrations analyzed in the WWTP influent and effluent compared to the broadspectrum antibiotics class of drugs sulfonamide or tetracycline. However, resistance genes for erythromycin, an antibiotic of last resort and emergency, are detected at low and high levels. These erm genes results do not correlate with the erythromycin consumption of Table 1. In contrast, the tet-genes and sul genes abundances corresponds to tetracycline or sulfonamide consumption in animal or human therapy (Table 1). Despite building sums of different tet genes and sul genes, highest ARGs abundances with relatively small standard deviations are recognizable. Moreover, sulfonamide and tetracycline antibiotics were introduced in medical use in 1935 and 1950, respectively providing a selection pressure for many decades and increasing opportunities for AMR formation in the aquatic environment. According to Fig. 1, the statement can be made that in particular tetracycline and sulfonamide resistance genes are suitable for ARGs monitoring of wastewater treatment processes. These genes had a relatively small standard deviation. Research studies of different countries resulted similar ARGs abundances measured in the influent and effluent of conventional WWTPs. Furthermore, this review revealed that the largest data set on AMR is available for broad-spectrum antibiotics providing the most comprehensive information for the evaluation of AMR in the urban water cycle. However, antibiotics of last resort and emergency antibiotics should also be considered to assess risks associated to the spread of AMR as well, since these antibiotics are often the last alternative to fight pathogenic bacteria in human therapy. 3.2. Natural occurrence and transfer of antibiotic microbial resistance Findings of several studies confirm that AMR in the aquatic environment is prevalent worldwide (Munir and Xagoraraki, 2011; Alexander et al., 2015; Allen et al., 2010; Kristiansson et al., 2011). However, it is important to note that AMR is a natural phenomenon, which is often referred to as background or baseline AMR. D'Costa et al. (2011) extracted samples from approximately 30,000-year-old Late Pleistocene permafrost sediments and determined ancient DNA. They identified ARGs like the ribosomal protection protein tetM that refers to tetracycline resistance genes. Permutation tests showed that ancient vanHA clones were similar to modern vanH and vanA genes and ancient vanAX clones were similar to modern vanA and vanX genes (D'Costa et al., 2011). Bacteria develop self-produced antibiotics to inhibit the increase of other bacteria populations in order to have an evolutionary advantage. For example, the bacterium Penicillium chrysogenum produces penicillin (Thompson, 1994). To compete against bacteria which produce antibiotics, other bacteria generate antibiotic resistances. Koch et al. (2014) observed this adaptation with Staphylococcus aureus bacteria that were not resistant to antibiotics. Under typical biofilm conditions in a confined space with limited nutrient supply, mutations of Staphylococcus aureus bacteria resulted in antibiotic production. After 5 days, three bacteria groups were detected, the susceptible bacteria, antibiotic producing bacteria, and antibiotic resistant bacteria (Koch et al., 2014). Furthermore, resistance formation can be divided into intrinsic and acquired resistance. While intrinsic resistance in bacteria is a stabile genetic property encoding chromosomally and found in all bacteria of a bacterial strain, acquired resistance genes are incorporated via horizontal gene transfer (HGT) by plasmids, transposons or integrons and transmissible genetic elements (Pak et al., 2016). Horizontal gene transfer is occurring naturally, independent of wastewater impact, not only across similar bacterial strains, but also between gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria as well as between pathogenic and nonpathogenic bacteria (Courvalin, 1994). For example, tetK and tetL genes were detected both in natural soil bacteria Bacillus spp. and in pathogenic Staphylococcus spp. (Salyers and Amábile-cuevas, 1997). 3.3. Sources of anthropogenically-derived AMR Different researchers (Sigala and Unc, 2012; Li et al., 2015; Rizzo et al., 2013) analyzed AMR in raw wastewater of residential areas, hospitals, and from the influent and the effluent of municipal WWTPs. The results of these three studies revealed that AMR did not only occur in hospital wastewater but also in residential wastewater and consequently in municipal WWTPs. Elevated AMR abundances were also detected in effluents from a slaughterhouse (Um et al., 2016; Moura et al., 2007) and antibiotic manufacturing facilities in China (Yang et al., 2008) and India (Larsson et al., 2007). Besides WWTPs, combined sewer overflows (CSOs) can results in elevated discharge of AMR into receiving streams during heavy rain events. Alexander et al. (2015) compared wastewater samples of four different CSO basins with samples from four different WWTPs in Germany. The total abundance of ampC, vanA, blaVIM, and ermB genes (1.23–4.05 log gene copies/100 mL) in the effluent samples of the CSO basins was lower compared to influent samples of the WWTPs but higher than effluent samples of the WWTPs. Scheurer et al. (2015) studied the retention of ARB E. coli, Enterococci, and Staphylococci in soil retention filters reporting removal efficiencies of about 3, 2 and 2 log units measured as CFU/100 mL, respectively. Another pathway of anthropogenically derived resistances into surface waters is agricultural run-off that has been in contact with manure and land-applied biosolids, which is still being practiced in Germany and worldwide (Munir and Xagoraraki, 2011). Knapp et al. (2010) analyzed ARGs from different classes of antibiotics in five long-term soil samples collected in the Netherlands between 1940 and 2008. Their results demonstrated that ARG from numerous classes of antibiotics increased significantly since 1940. Especially abundances of tetracycline ARG were 15 times higher in soil samples taken 2008 than from the 1970s. The facilities mentioned all contribute higher AMR abundances. These ARGs emissions can contribute to the increase of AMR in the aquatic environment. Future studies should also examine AMR emissions of these potential hot spots for the spread of antibiotic resistance. This review is focusing on AMR contributions from conventional WWTP discharges and on treatment strategies that are capable to reduce these AMR loads entering surface waters. Besides the direct release of ARB and ARGs from wastewater, manure and biosolids as potential antibiotic resistance factors into the environment, the constant exposure of bacteria to low concentrations of antibiotics might also constitute a continuous selection pressure on bacteria in aquatic systems. This can result in the adaption of susceptible strains becoming antibiotic resistant strains (Salcedo et al., 2015). Gullberg et al. (2011) demonstrated that adaption can already occur at antibiotic concentrations in the low μg/L range. The relative abundance of ARB increased at concentrations exceeding 1000 μg/L for streptomycin, N25 μg/L for tetracycline, and 0.46–2.88 μg/L for ciprofloxacin (Gullberg et al., 2011). The ratio of resistant to susceptible strains could be decoupled after 40 generations of growth using 2000 μg/L streptomycin, approximately 60 μg/L of tetracycline and 2.3 μg/L of ciprofloxacin. Comparable antibiotic concentrations were sporadically detected in water samples, e.g. Lien et al. (2016) reported between 0.6 and 40.2 μg/L of ciprofloxacin in urban hospital wastewater in Vietnam. van den Hengel et al. (2015) measured ciprofloxacin concentrations in the range of about 600 μg/L in hospital and about 100 μg/L in household toilet wastewater in the Netherlands. Jiang et al. (2014) measured tetracycline concentrations up to 26 μg/L and ciprofloxacin concentrations up to 0.6 μg/L in the Wangyang River, China. However, other scientists, e.g. Kümmerer (2004) and Alexander et al. (2015), observed lower antibiotic concentrations in hospital wastewater, WWTP effluent as well as in surface water. Le-Minh et al. (2010) reported efficient removal of antibiotics by conventional wastewater treatment processes with effluent concentrations of antibiotics in the range of 10–500 ng/L. The question how the discharge of urban (waste-) water affects the aquatic environment is strongly linked to the characterization of low AMR impacted surface water. There have been several attempts to quantify AMR in low impacted (pristine) surface waters. Pei et al. (2006) quantified sulphonamide and tetracycline resistance genes in sediments of the mixed-landscape watershed of the Cache La Poudre River in northern Colorado, USA. Sampling points were focused on pristine areas and both urban and agricultural affected areas. The relative abundances of resistance genes (normalized to the 16S gene copy number) in pristine areas were significantly lower (sul2 below detection limit and sul1, tetW, tetO about 2 log units gene copies/16S rRNA gene copies lower) for the pristine areas than for the anthropogenically affected areas, which was consistent with total ARB CFUs that were over an order of magnitude higher in the anthropogenic areas. The influence of wastewater inputs from WWTPs on four small streams in terms of ARGs was confirmed by Proia et al. (2016) by analyzing biofilm samples taken upstream and downstream of WWTPs. While low abundances of ARGs were detected at upstream sites (about 0.001–0.03 sul1 and 0.001–0.01 (ermB) gene copies/16S rRNA copies), up to one order of magnitude of ARG copies/ 16S rRNA copies higher relative abundances were observed at downstream sites (about 0.003–0.1 (sul1) and 0.01–0.1 (ermB) gene copies/16S rRNA copies). The presence of higher ARGs concentrations in downstream biofilms, water and sediment samples compared to upstream samples was even detectable in stream samples up to 1 km downstream of the point of discharge (Proia et al., 2016) and up to 20 km downstream of the point of discharge (Sabri et al., 2018). Further studies confirm the impact of conventional wastewater treatment plant discharges on AMR abundances in surface waters (Hembach et al., 2017; Jäger et al., 2018a, 2018b). The impact of discharge from conventional WWTPs regarding AMR abundances in surface waters is further examined in Chapter 3.4. 3.4. Fate and transport of AMR by WWTP discharges in the urban water cycle and AMR abundances of low and strong anthropogenically-impacted surface waters Different studies reporting ARB and ARG concentrations in WWTP effluent and river samples collected upstream and downstream of wastewater discharge points were critically reviewed to assess the fate and transport of AMR. The review was limited to studies presenting results from all three environmental compartments (i.e., upstream and downstream of discharge and WWTP effluents). However, as specific information about river discharge, degree of wastewater effluent impact, and sampling conditions (e.g., dry or wet weather, etc.) were often not reported, a more detailed data analysis could not be conducted. The investigated antibiotics (penicillin, tetracycline, sulfonamide and macrolides) with the highest consumptions (Table 1) and highest ARB and ARGs abundances analyzed in the influent and in the effluent of conventional WWTPs (expect of ampicillin concentrations) of Fig. 1 were subsequently analyzed in Fig. 2 for antibiotic resistant bacteria and antibiotic resistance gene abundances in Fig. 2. Furthermore, these antibiotics are evaluated due to long-term application in the medical sector providing a selection process of antibiotic resistance adaption in wastewater for many decades. The comparison of different studies reporting total abundance (Fig. 2A, C) and relative abundance (Fig. 2B, D) of ARB and ARGs in WWTP effluents and surface water prior to and after WWTP discharge clearly indicates that WWTPs are a significant contributor to the spread of bacterial resistance in receiving streams. Although the data revealed consistently elevated total ARB abundance (Fig. 2A) and relative abundances of N80% of the bacteria in WWTP effluent with antibiotic resistance (Fig. 2B), results from river samples are highly variable indicating likely different origin and degrees of anthropogenic impact prior to WWTP discharge. In contrast, abundance of ARGs in the examined samples vary from 2 to 7 log units gene copies/100 mL most likely depending on the analyzed resistance gene and the investigated WWTP (Fig. 2C, D). However, the majority of all corresponding samples exhibits an increase of AMR in surface water after the discharge of WWTP with the downstream samples representing a mixture of abundances from upstream surface water and WWTP effluent. Data from tetracycline and sulfamethoxazole resistance genes are evaluated because these compounds are commonly used antibiotics worldwide for a long time. This might have allowed AMR adaption to these antibiotics which can be detected at higher abundances than resistances to antibiotics which have been introduced more recently or applied at lower amounts (Chapter 3.1). However, the number of studies reporting total ARGs abundances in low impacted surface waters is insufficient to carry out a statistical assessment. Thus, available results of relative ARGs abundances (normalized by 16S gene copies) in WWTP effluents, urban (anthropogenically-affected) rivers, and low impacted rivers are summarized in Fig. 3. On the basis of the study results summarized in Fig. 3, a decreasing relative ARG abundance can be observed from WWTP effluents, to anthropogenically-affected urban surface water and very low detected relative ARG abundances in low impacted rivers. Further studies by Storteboom et al. (2010a, 2010b) on ARG abundances in WWTP effluents, urban and low impacted rivers confirmed the low abundances of ARGs in low impacted rivers. They investigated the La Poudre River and the South Platte River in Colorado, USA with a focus on the detection frequency of 11 tet genes and 2 sul genes. The average detection frequency of analyzed ARGs reached 56% in the WWTP effluent, 23% in urban rivers, and 8% in low impacted rivers in the first study (Storteboom et al., 2010a), and 70% in WWTP effluent, 29% in urban rivers, and 9% in low impacted rivers in a follow-up study (Storteboom et al., 2010b). In some studies, however, the ARG analyses revealed unexpectedly higher total ARG abundances in urban rivers compared to WWTP effluents (Böckelmann et al., 2009; Makowska et al., 2016). This might be a result of contributions by CSOs or other sources upstream of WWTPs since urban rivers cannot be considered low impacted waters in many settings. While a comparison of corresponding results from individual studies confirms the impact of treatment and discharge regarding ARG abundance, the findings also demonstrate that a comparison of data from different locations and studies is problematic (Fig. 2). It has to be considered that obtained data are related to target ARB, ARGs and specific antibiotics and can vary as a function of target bacteria and type of antibiotic and resistance gene. Even measuring the same ARG in various WWTP effluents may result in differences of several orders of magnitude. Furthermore, different ARGs that trigger AMR to the same antibiotic (e.g., tetO, tetW genes), question a direct causal relationship between single ARGs and the corresponding antibiotics. In addition, abundances of ARGs in surface waters with a low anthropogenic impact show region and gene specific differences (Alexander et al., 2015; Koczura et al., 2016; Makowska et al., 2016). Based on this information, defining discharge standards or removal targets for wastewater treatment facilities will be a challenging task for regulators without taken into account the local background abundance levels.
4. AMR removal efficiencies in different wastewater treatment processes 
Nine research studies of different wastewater treatment processes analyzing ARB abundances to tetracycline resistance have been selected to quantify AMR removal efficiencies. In addition, 17 research studies reporting ARGs abundances, detecting sulfonamide, tetracycline and beta-lactam resistance, are presented. Agar diffusion and agar dilution studies were considered. Fecal coliforms (FC), heterotrophic bacteria (HB), and enterococci (ENT) were evaluated for ARB analyses of different wastewater treatment processes. Due to highest ARB and ARGs concentrations detected in WWTP influents and effluents (Fig. 1), sulfonamide, tetracycline and beta-lactam resistances were evaluated for AMR using different advanced treatment processes. ARB and ARGs resistant to erythromycin was not investigated frequently enough to quantify AMR removal efficiencies during treatment processes. Removal efficiencies reported for different ARB and ARGs of different conventional and advanced water treatment processes are summarized in Fig. 4 and reported as log removal of total abundance. Relative abundances, which were reported in some studies, are only sporadically discussed for reasons described in Section 2. Detailed results from individual studies (including relative abundance data) can be found in Tables S1 and S2 (Supplemental Information). All investigated research studies analyzing antibiotic resistant bacteria are applying primarily the agar dilution method whereas all ARGs research studies are using predominantly quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) for ARGs analyses. The presented results need to be evaluated carefully as they are often based on single or few individual studies. The limited number of available studies for some processes demonstrates that future research is needed to improve the understanding of AMR removal during various conventional and advanced treatment processes. The AMR removal efficiency of conventional wastewater treatment plants is studied sufficiently. However, most studies investigating AMR in WWTP collected samples from plant influent and effluent, frequently not considering individual stages of an entire treatment train and hydraulic residence times to establish proper synoptic sampling. Furthermore, treatment conditions as well as the type of wastewater treatment were often not specified. Hence, AMR removal efficiencies in WWTPs are presented without differentiation of mechanical and biological treatment steps. Removal efficiencies of physical processes (e.g., sand and GAC filtration, membrane filtration) as well as oxidation and disinfection processes (i.e., UV irradiation, ozonation, chlorination) are discussed as individual treatment processes. The different research studies of sand and GAC filtration, microfiltration and ultrafiltration as well as membrane bioreactor processes demonstrated comparable results for AMR removal efficiency concerning the individual treatment process. However, physical treatment processes were not studied very often justifying further studies in particular for processes like bank filtration, nanofiltration and reverse osmosis. Studies analyzing oxidation and disinfection processes (i. e., UV irradiation, ozonation, chlorination) after conventional biological WWTP treatment represent the highest number of research studies. 4.1. Conventional biological wastewater treatment Observed removal of tet genes in WWTPs can vary between 2 and 4.5 log units gene copies/100 mL. However, this efficiency was not confirmed by reported data from tetracycline resistant E. coli, heterotrophic bacteria (HB), and Enterococci (ENT) suggested a decrease between 1.1 and 1.8 log units (CFU/100 mL) in conventional biological wastewater treatment processes. In WWTPs with trickling filters and submerged aerated filters, total abundances of tetracycline resistant bacteria decreased by b1 log units CFU/100 mL (Novo and Manaia, 2010) and N2 log units CFU/100 mL (Fry and Day, 1990; Galvin et al., 2010), respectively. Compared to tet genes, less efficient ARG removal during mechanical and activated sludge stages was reported for sul and bla genes (Fig. 4). Tong et al. (2019) studied the fate of antibiotic resistance genes during six different full-scale municipal wastewater treatment processes and revealed that horizontal gene transfer mainly occurs in aerated tanks whereas anaerobic or anoxic tanks can reduce the occurrence of antibiotic resistance. However, the total abundances of ARGs in the WWTP effluents (activated sludge) varied between b10 and 2.33 × 106 gene copies/100 mL (Alexander et al., 2015; Munir et al., 2011; Gao et al., 2012) making a comparison of different studies difficult. Mahfouz et al. (2018) examined the pan-genome of E. coli in WWTPs and hospitals showing no difference between influent and effluent of WWTPs. This means that conventional WWTPs can reduce the amount of bacteria into the environment, whereas the pathogenic potential for antibiotic resistance could not be reduced. Furthermore, the wastewater pan-genome was larger than a clinical pan-genome of similar size due to possible horizontal gene transfer in wastewater. Employing alternative processes for solids separation like membrane bioreactors seems to provide a viable alternative where improved removal for ARB and ARGs is desired. For example, efficient reduction by N5 log units gene copies/100 mL were measured for tet genes (tetG, tetW, tetX) and sul1 genes in a MBR with membrane pore size of 0.1 to 0.4 μm (Du et al., 2015). The total ARG abundances in the effluent samples varied from 103 to 107 gene copies/100 mL. For an MBR with a membrane pore size of 0.04 μm, similar removal efficiency was reported for tet genes while the decline of sul genes was surprisingly lower (Fig. 4) (Munir et al., 2011). Only 2.7 to 4 log ARGs (tet, sul and bla genes) removal by MBR technology with pore sizes of 100 kDa and 0,3 μm were detected by Kappell et al. (2018) and Cheng and Hong (2017). Munir et al. reported in the MBR study a 1–3 log units gene copies/100 mL higher ARGs removal efficiency compared to conventional wastewater treatment. In addition, 3 and 5 log abatement of tetracycline and sulfonamide resistant HB (CFU/100 mL), respectively, was reported. For non-resistant E. coli bacteria even higher removal efficiencies N6 log units are known for MBR treatment (Luca et al., 2013; Marti et al., 2011). Further studies are recommended to confirm the reported AMR removal efficiencies using MBR technology and to elucidate the underlying retention mechanisms. 4.2. Physical treatment processes Several studies examined removal efficiencies of AMR employing physical treatment processes under various operational conditions including granular media filtration, adsorption onto GAC, and different membrane processes. 4.2.1. Granular media filtration and GAC adsorption Studies investigating AMR in sand and GAC filtration were performed at water treatment plants (Xu et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; El-Zanfaly, 2015), but also at wastewater treatment facilities, where filtration was used as a tertiary treatment process (Lüddeke et al., 2015) or as post-treatment after ozonation (Czekalski et al., 2016; Alexander et al., 2016; Lüddeke et al., 2015). Available studies reported limited AMR removal efficiencies varying between inefficient up to 2 log units removal by sand filtration. Even an increase up to 1 log unit was reported for heterotrophic bacteria and ARGs in some studies (see Tables S1 and S2). Different results have been attributed to varying operational conditions and pre-exposures to antibiotic and AMR containing waters as most filters are biologically active (Czekalski et al., 2016). However, the current data do not allow a definite assessment of relevant mechanisms for the retention as well as transport of ARB and ARGs within sand filtration, e.g. horizontal gene transfer or biotic and abiotic factors that influence the observed AMR abundances. In most studies, operational conditions such as empty bed contact time, filter loading rate, filter media, grain size and backwash protocols were not specified. As expected from previous studies on non-resistant bacteria, few studies investigating AMR removal efficiencies by GAC filtration did not observe a strong removal enhancement compared to sand filtration (El-Zanfaly, 2015; Lüddeke et al., 2015). Thus, further investigations are needed to better understand the fate and transport of ARGs during granular media filtration as a function of operational conditions. 4.2.2. Membrane filtration The rejection of suspended solids and total dissolved compounds during membrane treatment processes can be divided based on the membrane type into low-pressure membrane filtration (microfiltration, ultrafiltration) and high-pressure membrane filtration (nanofiltration, reverse osmosis). Microfiltration membranes are designed to reduce inorganic and organic particulate compounds with a size of 0.1–1 μm. By applying ultrafiltration (pore-size of 0.01 to 0.1 μm), a removal of bacteria and viruses can be achieved as well. Nanofiltration (NF, molecular weight cut-off 0.3–2 kDa) and reverse osmosis (RO, molecular weight cut-off b100 Da) are commonly applied water treatment processes where high water qualities are desired and are capable of removing impurities such as bacteria, viruses but also dissolved constituents including ions. Available data on AMR removal efficiencies during membrane treatment other than MBRs are limited. First studies confirm the high potential of membranes as a barrier for ARGs (Böckelmann et al., 2009; Breazeal et al., 2013). Breazeal et al., 2013 demonstrated a strong dependency of ARG reduction on the pore size or molecular weight cutoff of MF, UF and NF-membranes for the blaTEM gene (i.e., up to 1 log unit gene copies/100 mL with a pore size of 0.45 μm and 0.1 μm, 1.7 log units removal at 100 kDa, 4.7 log units removal at 10 kDa and N 5.7 log units at 1 kDa). The authors of the study suggested an association of the removal of ARGs to DNA-colloid interactions. To the best of our knowledge, the impact of other relevant parameters (i.e., water quality, fouling propensities, flux) has not been systematically studied yet. Further studies are recommended to understand underlying mechanisms and to confirm ARGs removal efficiencies as a function of key operational parameters. 4.3. Oxidation and disinfection processes Removal of AMR by UV irradiation, ozonation and chlorination has been studied in more detail and researchers covered a wide range of oxidant dosages. Illustration of results in Fig. 4 followed the approach to only include data relevant for environmental application. Data from experiments with extremely high or low dosages were excluded based on expert knowledge, detailed results from literature can be found in Tables S1 and S2. 4.3.1. UV irradiation UV irradiation is a disinfection technology using ultraviolet (UV) light resulting in the damage of DNA nucleotides of pathogens. The German drinking water directive requires a UV fluence of 40 mJ/cm2 for disinfection (TrinkwV, 2018). The National Water Research Institute (NRWI) in the USA recommends equivalent fluences N20 mJ/cm2 for successful MS 2 phage reduction and about 180 mJ/cm2 for successful Adenovirus inactivation in drinking water purification. In contrast, equivalent doses up to 100 mJ/cm2 for MS 2 reduction are recommended by NRWI for UV disinfection in water reuse applications, depending on the specific pretreatment (e.g., granular media filtration, membrane filtration) (Emerick et al., 2012). Generally, applied UV fluences for WWTP effluent disinfection usually vary between 60 and 200 mJ/cm2 (Bourrouet et al., 2001; Jolis et al., 2001). Total abundances of sulfamethoxazole and tetracycline resistant HB and tetracycline resistant FC significantly decreased at typical UV disinfection fluences (Meckes, 1982; Luczkiewicz et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2013 and Munir et al., 2011). However, despite effective abatement of tetracycline resistant fecal coliforms (CFU/100 mL dropped by 2.7 log units at UV fluence of 45 mJ/cm2 ), the relative abundance of tetracycline resistant FC increased by 435% (Meckes, 1982). An increase in relative abundance of target tetracycline resistant bacteria was also confirmed in other studies (Guo et al., 2013; Luczkiewicz et al., 2011) indicating that bacteria carrying antibiotic resistance are also more tolerant to UV irradiation than non-resistant bacteria. Meckes (1982) suggested that specific proteins which are responsible for tetracycline resistance, may absorb UV light and protect the bacteria. However, the generally low ARB removal efficiencies of the presented UV irradiation studies could also be a matter of photo-reactivation (Hijnen et al., 2006; Jungfer et al., 2007; Guo et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2012) as well as other factors like protection by colloids and particles in wastewater. Available literature data on ARB removal are not consistent and do not reflect inactivation efficiencies reported for non-resistant bacteria. Although driving mechanism of UV disinfection results in DNA damage, limited removal of ARGs was reported at UV fluences typically applied for disinfection (b200 mJ/m2 ; McKinney et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2015). Compared to rapid inactivation of ARB, high fluences are needed to remove ARGs (Zhuang et al., 2015). It is suggested that this discrepancy might be an artifact of the applied qPCR analyses of ARGs using short amplicons often b200 base pairs whereas an increase in amplicon length would likely result in increased log removal of ARGs. This effect was previously reported for the analysis of virus removal by UV disinfection using qPCR methods (Ho et al., 2016). Results from a recent study confirmed higher fluence-based rate constants for ARG removal towards increasing amplicon size and also indicate that the entire plasmid needs to be intact for horizontal gene transfer by transformation (Yoon et al., 2018). Moreover, McKinney et al. (2012) observed minor destruction of intracellular ARGs than extracellular ARGs and strong positive correlation to adjacent CC pyrimidine counts leading to high proportion of undamaged ARGs. The authors also pointed out that gram positive bacteria (VRE) are less sensitive to UV exposure than gram negative bacteria (McKinney et al., 2012). These results demonstrate that fundamental understanding of underlying principles is needed to assess the fate of ARGs in different processes and resulting consequences for their spread in the environment. Molecular methods with qPCR might provide valuable information if their respective limitations are taken into account during data interpretation while assessing a specific process. 4.3.2. Ozonation The German drinking water directive allows a maximum ozone dosage of 10 mg/L for disinfection (TrinkwV, 2018). In addition to disinfection, ozone is widely applied for oxidation of trace organic compounds, where also simultaneous hydroxyl-radical reactions might take place (Lazarova et al., 2013). Recommended ozone dosages for removal of trace organic compounds are in the range of 0.4 to 1.0 mg O3/mg DOC depending on removal objectives and target compounds. Recent studies indicated that germicidal effects of ozone depend on microbial community type (Alexander et al., 2016; Czekalski et al., 2016) as well as water quality parameters such as alkalinity, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and the presence of particles (TSS/turbidity), which can negatively affect the stability of ozone and protect microorganisms attached to the surface of particles (Czekalski et al., 2016). The disinfection efficiency of ozone depends on the ozone exposure, i.e. the integration of ozone concentration over contact time, which is highly affected by the specific water quality. Especially in wastewater matrices, DOC, suspended solids (SS), residual nitrite concentrations, and particulate matter from activated sludge treatment can result in a rapid depletion of ozone and limited efficiency for disinfection (Czekalski et al., 2016; Pak et al., 2016; Lee and von Gunten, 2016; Zucker et al., 2015). Elevated ozone doses to improve disinfection efficiency, however, are often limited by the formation of the carcinogenic by-product bromate (Hübner et al., 2015). Consequently, full-scale ozone treatment of wastewater (0.55 mg O3/mg DOC) resulted in limited inactivation of 1–2 log units CFU/100 mL of ARB (Czekalski et al., 2016). Cultivation based analyses suggested higher removal efficiencies. For cultivable tetracycline resistant E. coli, 1.5, 2.5 and 5.5 log units CFU/ 100 mL could be achieved using elevated ozone dosages of 3, 5 and 7 mg O3/L, respectively, in a laboratory-scale study (Oh et al., 2014). In contrast to ARB, limited removal of ARGs has been reported during wastewater (Alexander et al., 2016; Czekalski et al., 2016) and drinking water ozonation (Xu et al., 2016). This was mainly in agreement with results from taxonomic gene markers for specific bacterial strains (Alexander et al., 2016). Only very high ozone dosages resulted in more efficient removal of genes (Zhuang et al., 2015). To date, the exact mode of action of ozone on microbial cells is not completely understood. Several studies reported damage of cell membranes during ozonation, even before DNA damage might occur (Czekalski et al., 2016). However, Patil et al. (2011) concluded in their study that cell lysis was not the major mechanism of microbial inactivation. In addition, cell damages caused by ozone can be repaired due to high activity of cellular repair enzymes (von Sonntag and von Gunten, 2012). Michael-Kordatou et al. (2018) suggested further optimization potential of the ozonation process (regarding ozone dose and contact time) for enhanced AMR removal. Further studies are needed to better understand ARB inactivation mechanisms and damage of ARGs in ozonation processes. 4.3.3. Chlorination Chlorination is the most common applied water and wastewater disinfection process worldwide. The maximum permitted dose is 4.7 mg/L free Cl2 for calcium hypochlorite (Ca(OCl)2) and 6 mg/L free Cl2 for chlorine gas (Cl2) and sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) during drinking water treatment according to the German drinking water directive (TrinkwV, 2018). Usually applied chlorine dosages to disinfect WWTP effluents are in the range of 5–10 mg/L with 30 min contact time (Zhuang et al., 2015). The disinfection efficiency of chlorine depends on the chlorine exposure, which is often calculated simply as dosage or reactor effluent concentration multiplied by contact time. As inactivation rates for chlorination of numerous bacteria strains are well documented in literature, the same mechanisms for inactivation of ARB and not-resistant bacteria can be expected. Unfortunately, many studies investigating the fate of antibiotic resistance during chlorination do not report specific operational information like chlorine exposure or process relevant water quality data such as DOC, suspended solids, NH4-N concentrations, floc structure, and pH value. Studies investigating ARB removal efficiencies during chlorination confirm experiences from disinfection of non-resistant bacteria achieving N3 log units removal at relevant dosages (Huang et al., 2011). However, also less efficient removal has been reported for ARBs (Munir et al., 2011; Oh et al., 2014). In addition, at chlorine dosages b2.5 mg/L of sodium hypochlorite, the removal efficiency of the detected ARB was incomplete and a regrowth of the ARB was observed (Huang et al., 2011). Similar tolerance of ARB against low chlorine dosages was reported by Yuan et al. (2015). Sulfadiazine and erythromycin resistant bacteria were not eliminated until chlorine exposure was increased up to 60 and 150 mg Cl2 min/L. Similar to UV disinfection and ozonation, little removal of ARGs was reported during chlorination (Zhang et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2015; Fahrenfeld et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2016) with some exceptions from experiments with high or unspecified dosages (Xu et al., 2016; Zhuang et al., 2015). Yuan et al. (2015) hypothesized that the chlorination process cannot damage the plasmid structure so that transformability of ARGs is still feasible. The study of full-scale WWTP with chlorination (applying a dose of 8–9 mg/L chlorine at 30 min contact time) by Liu et al. (2018) revealed an increase of relative abundance of intracellular and extracellular ARGs. 5. Conclusions This review provides a comprehensive overview regarding the current knowledge about analysis, occurrence and treatment of AMR in the anthropogenically impacted water cycle with the intention to identify knowledge gaps and future research needs. Numerous researchers have demonstrated elevated levels of antibiotic resistant bacteria and especially resistance genes in municipal wastewater effluents in contrast to receiving urban streams as well as pristine or low impacted water bodies. These findings confirm that discharge from wastewater treatment plants can result in significant contributions of AMR to the aquatic environment. This discharge of pathogenic bacteria carrying antibiotic resistance into surface waters might pose a potential threat to human health, especially if receiving rivers are subject to downstream use, for instance for recreational purposes or drinking water abstraction. However, the acute and long-term risk resulting from the release of resistance genes into the aquatic environment but also the presence of naturally-occurring resistance background, requires further studies. Further research is needed to better understand potential pathways and threat of water-borne resistance genes to human health, even if they are not linked to living pathogenic bacteria. This information is needed to inform a risk-based determination of removal targets for wastewater treatment. The regulatory discussion on AMR should also include restrictions to the occurrence of antibiotics, since already low μg/L concentrations might constitute a selective pressure for adaption of antibiotic susceptible to antibiotic resistant bacteria in WWTPs and in specific cases maybe even in the aquatic environment. In addition, the adaption to AMR in WWTPs and aquatic environment needs additional research to fully characterize potential risks. Another important task is the application of standardized analytical techniques to determine occurrence of antibiotic resistance and to verify removal efficiencies by different treatment processes. Cultivation methods enable the detection of living organisms with antibiotic resistance but are limited to the determination of viable and cultivable bacteria. In contrast, qPCR provide a rapid detection method for antibiotic resistance genes reporting thus an “antibiotic resistance potential”, but are lacking information on the acute risk, as results are not linked to pathogens. In order to provide reliable information on treatment efficiency for different processes from qPCR analysis, underlying mechanisms for inactivation need to be well understood, considering also the gene intactness to mitigate overestimations of ARG abundances. New qPCR technologies, such as digital PCR, may furthermore help to establish new standards based on absolute gene occurrences. Evaluation of removal efficiency using qPCR requires a solid understanding of processes since different investigated gene lengths of the same ARG may render the comparison of studies difficult without further validation. In addition, monitoring of fate and transport of AMR should focus on different antibiotic classes. Resistance for broad spectrum antibiotics, with occurrence in aquatic systems can be used as indicators to evaluate removal efficiencies in different processes, whereas AMR to antibiotics of last resort are more relevant to assess associated risks. Thus, the following indicator ARGs are suggested to monitor for AMR: resistance genes of broad-spectrum antibiotics sul1, sul2 and tet genes (tetA, tetB, tetO and tetW) as well as resistance genes of antibiotics of last resort vanA and blaVIM. For ARBs, the following suitable indicators are proposed: Fecal coliforms, P. aeruginosa, Enterococci, and Enterobacteria. While ample information is available regarding the fate of AMR in different conventional and advanced treatment processes, systematic studies to determine the impact of key operational and site-specific parameters (e.g., sampling conditions, dry or wet weather, wastewater parameters, antibiotic concentrations, degree of wastewater contributions in rivers) and mechanisms responsible for the observed attenuation (e.g., photo-reactivation effect) are often lacking. Conventional wastewater treatment plants are capable of reducing AMR by several orders of magnitude. Reported removal efficiencies, however, are highly variable and likely depend on treatment type, operational settings applied, and other still unknown factors. Micro- and ultrafiltration employed in membrane bioreactors can provide an efficient barrier to antibiotic resistance in wastewater. Also advanced non-submerged membrane treatment of wastewater effluent will probably result in similar performance. Key parameter for the retention of bacteria and genes is the pore size of the membrane, but also the formation of cake layers might contribute to overall performance. Available results from granular media filtration studies are of preliminary nature since relevant operational parameters were often not specified. However, some results indicate significant potential for filter optimization to achieve removal of several orders of magnitude. Studies on biologically active systems operating with longer retention times (e.g., groundwater recharge, bank filtration) are lacking. The removal of ARGs by oxidation and disinfection is closely related to the mode of action of the respective oxidants. Disinfection processes provide an efficient barrier for pathogenic bacteria independent whether they carry AMR. However, it is noteworthy that ozonation of wastewater often is designed for removal of trace organic chemicals at which dose it cannot be considered a reliable disinfection process as it typically achieves approximately 1–2 log inactivation for bacteria. Furthermore, combinations of advanced treatment processes should be examined regarding their removal of antibiotic resistance.
