This study quantified antibiotic and antibiotic resistance gene (ARG) concentrations in hospital and communal wastewaters as well as the influents and effluents of the receiving urban wastewater treatment plants (UWWTP) in two Dutch cities. In only one city, hospital wastewater was treated on-site using advanced technologies, including membrane bioreactor treatment (MBR), ozonation, granulated activated carbon (GAC) and UV-treatment.

On-site hospital wastewater (HWW) treatment reduced gene presence of hospital-related antibiotic resistance genes and antibiotic concentrations in the receiving urban wastewater treatment plant. These findings support the need for on-site treatment of high-risk point sources of antibiotic resistance genes.

13 antibiotic resistance genes, Integrase Class 1 and 16S rRNA concentrations were quantified using multiplex quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) assays and the presence and/or concentration of 711 antibiotics were analyzed.

Hospital wastewater contained approximately 25% more antibiotics and gene concentrations between 0.4 log to 1.8-fold higher than communal wastewater (CWW). blaKPC and vanA could be identified as hospital-related genes and were reduced to under the limit of detection (LOD) during on-site treatment. Advanced on-site treatment removed between 0.5 and 3.6-fold more genes than conventional biological urban wastewater treatment (activated sludge). Advanced on-site treatment was able to eliminate 12 out of 19 detected antibiotics, while urban waste water treatment eliminated up to 1 (out of 21 detected). Different advanced treatment technologies were able to target different pollutants to varying extents, making sequential alignment more effective. MBR treatment was most efficient in antibiotic resistance gene reduction and ozonation in antibiotic reduction.

blaKPC could only be detected in the influent of the urban wastewater treatment plant receiving untreated hospital wastewater. Similarly, vanA was only consistently detected in this treatment plant. These results indicate a positive effect of on-site treatment of hospital wastewater on the communal sewage system.
Antibiotic Resistance (AR) is a growing global threat which will require worldwide joint efforts to be conquered (ECDC/EMEA Joint Technical Report: The bacterial challenge, 2009; ECDC strategic multi-annual programme 2014–2020, 2014). Hospitals have been in the focus of AR research as one of the high-risk point sources of antibiotics (Brown et al., 2006; Kümmerer, 2001; Lien et al., 2016) and ARGs (Berendonk et al., 2015; Harris et al., 2010; Harris et al., 2013a, Harris et al., 2013b; Harris et al., 2013a, Harris et al., 2013b; Lien et al., 2016; Rowe et al., 2017). Although, the release of untreated HWW might be posing a hazard to the environment and human health, there are still few studies investigating the release and direct impact of HWW into the environment or communal sewage system (Czekalski et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2018a). Due to this gap in information, regulations for the treatment of HWW are absent in most countries (Aukidy et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2010; Rodriguez-Mozaz et al., 2015).

The release of untreated HWW could increase ARG prevalence in environmental water bodies. Antibiotic resistant bacteria were shown to survive in the HWW, in the UWWTPs and, subsequently, the UWWTP effluent (Thompson et al., 2013). The risk potential of HWW is further increased by the fact that hospitals use last-resort antibiotics (e.g. piperacillin and vancomycin) more frequently and thus their ARG profiles might be different when compared to other wastewaters (Kümmerer and Henninger, 2003). Overall, conventional wastewater treatment renders limited results in terms of antibiotic and ARG removal and might even increase the concentration of certain ARGs (Berendonk et al., 2015; Luo et al., 2014; Narciso-Da-Rocha et al., 2014; Szczepanowski et al., 2009; Szekeres et al., 2017).

The present study investigates the impact and efficiency of antibiotic, ARG and bacterial removal of advanced on-site treatment compared to urban wastewater treatment. The effect of different advanced treatment steps and their impact on the downstream urban wastewater system are studied. ARG occurrence and concentrations in HWWs and CWWsin the Netherlands are compared to identify potential differences. To this end genes conferring resistance to aminoglycosides (aph(III)a), β-Lactam Antibiotics (blaKPC, blaSHV, blaOXA, mecA), macrolides (ermB, ermF), quinolones (qnrS), sulfonamides (sul1), tetracyclines (tetB, tetM) and vancomycines (vanA, vanB) as well as a class 1 Integrase (intI1) were screened for and quantified. A total of 711 antibiotics were investigated, out of which 41 were quantified and 670 were screened for presence in the samples. Further, correlations between antibiotic and ARG concentrations were studied.
