Highlights
•
WWTPs are the major source of antibiotics, ARB and ARG spread in the environment.
•
Resistance genes to main classes of antibacterial drugs are characterized.
•
230 of ARGs in sewage and activated sludge samples are reviewed.
•
Methods to reduce propagation of AR in the environment are discussed.
Abstract
The intensive use of antibiotics for human, veterinary and agricultural purposes, results in their continuous release into the environment. Together with antibiotics, antibiotic-resistant bacteria (ARB) and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) are introduced into wastewater. Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are believed to be probable hotspots for antibiotic resistance dissemination in the environment as they offer convenient conditions for ARB proliferation as well as for horizontal transfer of ARGs among different microorganisms. In fact, genes conferring resistance to all classes of antibiotics together with mobile genetic elements (MGEs) like plasmids, transposons, bacteriophages, integrons are detected in WWTPs in different countries. It seems that WWTPs with conventional treatment processes are capable of significant reduction of ARB but are not efficient in ARG removal. Implementation of advanced wastewater cleaning processes in addition to a conventional wastewater treatment is an important step to protect the aquatic environment. Growing interest in presence and fate of ARB and ARGs in WWTP systems resulted in the fact that knowledge in this area has increased staggeringly in the past few years. The main aim of the article is to collect and organize available data on ARGs, that are commonly detected in raw sewage, treated wastewater or activated sludge. Resistance to the antibiotics usually used in antibacterial therapy belonging to main classes like beta-lactams, macrolides, quinolones, sulfonamides, trimethoprim and tetracyclines was taken into account. The presence of multidrug efflux genes is also included in this paper. The occurrence of antibiotics may promote the selection of ARB and ARGs. As it is important to discuss the problem considering all aspects that influence it, the levels of antibiotics detected in influent and effluent of WWTPs were also presented.
Antibiotic resistance is recognized as one of the most important challenges of contemporary medicine and the serious public health problem. This is an extremely dangerous phenomenon, which consequently prevents the effective treatment of bacterial infections and may be the cause of epidemic threats and high mortality. The occurrence of the resistance phenomenon in all species of microorganisms and for each group of antibiotics has been described. Fig. 1 presents the time that has passed since the introduction of individual antibiotics to the observation of appearance of bacteria resistant towards them. Noteworthy is the fact of significant decrease in the number of antibiotics introduced since the 1970s (Clatworthy et al., 2007).
In addition, as it is noted in many countries, the number of ARB is constantly increasing (Segura et al., 2009). Based on the data obtained for European Union and European Economic Activity countries, ARB caused 671,689 infections in 2015 and contribute to >33,000 deaths each year (Cassini et al., 2019). According to the data published by the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) in 2009, the cost of hospitalization of patients infected by selected multidrug-resistant bacteria was estimated at least EUR 1.5 billion each year (ECDC/EMEA Technical Report, 2009). While in the United States in 2014, this cost was estimated at approximately $ 2.2 billion annually (Thorpe et al., 2018). The situation is similar around the world, and even more serious in low- and middle-income countries, where a high incidence of infectious diseases is observed (Bougnom and Piddock, 2017). Therefore, the World Health Organization (WHO) and ECDC recognized antibiotic resistance as one of the most important public health problems of the 21st century, which needs to be immediately resolved (Versporten et al., 2014). The fact that it was the main subject of the G20 summit (September 2016, Hangzhou, China), as well as the General Assembly of the United Nations (September 2016, New York, USA) reflects the seriousness of the situation. Antibiotic resistance is distinctly a global challenge and local activity is necessary to reduce its spread via the environment. It turns out that application of regional management regimes for clinical and agricultural use of antibiotics, together with increased control of antibiotic disposal, in many cases have confirmed efficiency in the reducing antibiotic resistance problem at the national level (Pruden et al., 2013).
Since the introduction of antibiotics into medicine in the 1940s, they have become central to modern healthcare. Their role has expanded from treating serious infections to preventing infections in surgical patients and protecting people with compromised immune system or cancer. They are also commonly used in promoting growth and preventing disease in livestock (Gelband et al., 2015). The consequence of their high consumption, incorrect medication disposal methods or excretion by humans and animals is the getting through of antibiotics, their metabolites and transformation products into hospital and municipal sewage. In the environment, antibiotics are not only chemical pollutants that can exert toxic effects, but they are above all able to cause selection pressure. This phenomenon consists in the elimination of microorganisms (sensitive to antibiotics) and the survival of resistant cells, the characteristics of which allow them to overcome the adverse effects of antibiotics (Birosova et al., 2014). WWTPs, due to their specificity and mode of functioning, are beginning to be seen as reservoirs of resistance - places where the phenomenon of resistance spreading is particularly intense, while antibiotics, antibiotic-resistant microorganisms, and genes that determine the resistance are perceived as a new kind of especially dangerous environmental pollutants (emerging contaminants), so far underestimated in applied technologies of WWTP systems (Czekalski et al., 2015; Pruden et al., 2006; Rysz and Alvarez, 2004). Furthermore, WWTPs turn out to be the main source of the antibiotics, ARB and ARG spread in various environmental components (Karkman et al., 2018). A detailed diagram of the antibiotic resistance prevalence process in the environment, with the participation of WWTPs, is presented in Fig. 2.
Available reports provided information about significantly increased abundance of antibiotic resistance determinants at the outlet of the sewage treatment plants (e.g. Alexander et al., 2015; Bengtsson-Palme et al., 2016; Neudorf et al., 2017). Currently, there are no legal regulations or guidelines that define the permitted levels of antibiotics or antibiotic resistance determinants that can be released into the environment. Wastewaters after the treatment process are discharged to the receiving environments, such as surface waters (rivers, lakes, seas or oceans) (Allen et al., 2010), or into agriculture soils and crops as the result of irrigation with reclaimed wastewater (Christou et al., 2017) where the resistance may be transmitted between bacteria including pathogenic bacteria, which is a special threat to human health, or even life. Especially dangerous are multidrug resistant bacteria, which are identified among commonly occurring bacterial species (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae or Staphylococcus aureus), causing the most frequent hospital and community-acquired infections (infections of urinary tract, skin and subcutaneous tissue, blood or pneumonia) (Luo et al., 2014).
There are several ways by which ARGs are acquired by bacteria. These include vertical gene transfer, i.e. - transmission of modified genetic information located on bacterial chromosome to subsequent generations of daughter cells, and horizontal gene transfer (HGT), which is mediated by MGEs, including plasmids, transposons, integrons and bacteriophages. The uptake of extracellular, free DNA (transformation) is also possible (Rizzo et al., 2013). Depending on the type of antibiotic, four basic mechanisms of microbial resistance can be observed, as shown in Fig. 3. They include: (1) active antibiotic removal from bacterial cell using an efflux pump; (2) creating an alternative metabolic pathway performing a similar or the same function as the path inactivated by the drug or limiting the cell's need for metabolites produced in the inhibited pathway; (3) modification of antibiotic target; (4) enzymatic inactivation of the medicine (Lin et al., 2015).
In the face of discussed problems, there is a noticeably growing interest of the scientific community in the global plan of antibiotic resistance reduction, adopted at the 68th World Health Assembly (May 2015, Geneva, Switzerland). Its consequence is the emergence of an increasing number of publications providing data on ARGs detected in WWTPs. Therefore, the aim of the present review is to collect and summarize the available information on the occurrence of ARGs in influent, effluent, and activated sludge samples. Discussion of the summarized data covers main problems concerning ARGs and ARB in WWTPs, such as: the comparison of the amounts of resistance genes in raw and treated wastewater in the context of conventional wastewater treatment plant effectiveness assessment, the presence of mobile genetic elements in WWTP systems as a factor that significantly influences the ARG dissemination, and the special problem that is hospital sewage. It has been already documented that the operating conditions and different wastewater treatment technologies influence e.g. the occurrence and consequent release of ARGs and ARB into the environment. Therefore, different methods including conventional disinfectants (chlorine and ozone), UV treatment, and advanced oxidation processes (Fenton oxidation, solar-driven Fenton oxidation, and photocatalytical oxidation) are presented and discussed in the context of their application in wastewater treatment and impact on fate of ARB and ARGs. Finally, some ideas arising from reviewed literature on how to reduce the spread of antibiotic resistance are presented. The resistance genes for the most commonly used groups of antibiotics (beta-lactams, macrolides, quinolones, sulfonamides, trimethoprim, and tetracyclines) were selected based on current data of the antimicrobial consumption in the hospital and community sector (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). As can be seen from the available data, significant content of these chemical compounds was also recorded in sewage samples. The presence of multidrug resistance (MDR) is also included in this paper. According to our knowledge, it is the first review that summarizes the available research data for ARGs detected in WWTP systems.
2. ARGs in WWTPs
According to reviewed literature ARGs representing every mechanism (e.g. target protection, target modification, drug modification, reduced permeability or efflux) of resistance available in nature were detected in WWTPs. Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6 presents list of beta-lactam, macrolide, quinolone, tetracycline, sulphonamide, trimethoprim resistance genes as well as multidrug efflux genes detected in influent, effluent and activated sludge of WWTPs in different countries. The data include both examples of the genes that have been detected in bacterial isolates or in total DNA isolated from WWTP samples. Two main approaches, namely culture-based or molecular-based, are followed to study antibiotic resistance problem in WWTPs, each of them exhibits some advantages and drawbacks. Culture-based methods are key to understand phenotypic characteristics of isolates and their resistance patterns, but they have limits with environmental bacteria (as culturable fraction is only 1% of the total). Molecular methods based on isolation of total DNA from analyzed samples (influent, effluent or activated sludge) and detection of specific nucleotide sequences coding ARGs using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and/or quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) techniques are applied to identify specific DNA targets in microorganisms that cannot be grown in the laboratory or multiply very slowly but significantly contribute to the resistance problem. It is well known that the nucleic acid extraction process and quality of isolated DNA are crucial for the subsequent PCR gene detection. Wastewater samples are complex matrices and contains high levels of organic and inorganic matter, inhibitors as humic substances or detergents which make the detection of specific bacterial species and functional genes difficult. Reduced detection sensitivity in environmental samples may produce an underestimation of the number of initial targets or false negative results (Volkmann et al., 2007). Nevertheless, as it is demonstrated in the available literature, qPCR technique could be successfully applied in research of antibiotic resistance in WWPT samples.

Nowadays, molecular high-throughput (HT) technologies are valuable tools to study natural microbial communities, their diverse genomic capacities, and gene expression activities (next generation sequencing). It has to be mentioned that metagenome and transcriptome analyses via next generation sequencing analyses need databank entries of reference bacteria genomes to compare gene sequences and gene activities. The fact that the bacteria reference data are still limited to few isolates (mostly from clinical origin) is an undeniable limitation of this method. In contrast to the HT approaches, the more conventional techniques (PCR, qPCR) are limited by the availability of specific primer sets (Yang et al., 2014).
A review of available literature (summarized in Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6) has shown that most of the research concerned ARGs from WWTPs with conventional treatment processes which is the most commonly used system in different countries. WWTPs typically include different processes (e.g. mechanical, biological, physical, chemical and physical–chemical) which may affect the fate of antibiotics, ARB and ARGs in different ways and consequently the development and spread of resistance into the environment. The conventional wastewater treatment is divided into distinct stages. The first or primary stage consists of physical removal of oils and greases along with sedimentation of large particles. The secondary phase of treatment utilizes microbial organisms to reduce the amount of organic matter in the wastewater. The most common method is conventional activated sludge however others biological treatments like membrane bioreactors (MBR), moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR), or fixed bed bioreactors (FBR) are starting to be used in modern municipal WWTPs. In the final step, tertiary wastewater treatment processes can be employed to further improve water quality (Quach-Cu et al., 2018).
The occurrence of antibiotic residues in WWTPs play an important role in the maintenance and spread of ARB and their genes and besides selecting resistant phenotypes may also disturb the indigenous bacterial communities (Rizzo et al., 2013). On the one hand subinhibitory concentrations of antibiotics promote HGT but at the same time the resulted positive selection reduces HGT by eliminating potential recipients in the environment (Karkman et al., 2018). It is important to discuss the problem considering all aspects that influence it. That is why the selected data on the levels of antibiotics detected in influent and effluents of WWTPs are also presented.
Some authors studied the presence of ARB and ARGs in influent and effluent of the same WWTP, which enabled the assessment of the effectiveness of WWTPs in resistance gene removal. The observed changes (reduction or increase) in concentrations of resistance genes between influent an effluent are marked with arrows (↓↑) in the Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6.
2.1. Beta-lactam resistance genes
Beta-lactams (penicillins and cephalosporins) constitute a class of broad-spectrum antibiotics, which contain a beta-lactam ring in their molecular structures. The presence of the ring is responsible for their antibacterial activity, while the side groups cause variability of pharmacological properties. Beta-lactam antibiotics interfere with the bacterial cell wall biosynthesis by inactivation of penicillin-binding proteins (PBPs), the enzymes requisite for synthesis of the peptidoglycan layer (McManus, 1997). They belong to antimicrobials commonly used clinically in both medicine and veterinary medicine (Li et al., 2007). According to the collected data, penicillins and cephalosporins are the most often prescribed antibiotics. Their consumption for systemic use in the European hospital sector, expressed as the defined daily dose (DDD) per 1000 inhabitants per day, was on the level of 11.4, while the average consumption of beta-lactams for systemic use in the community was 0.92 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). Altogether, they make more than half of all commercially available antibiotics in use (Van Boeckel et al., 2014). Although beta-lactams, especially penicillins, are the most commonly used antimicrobial agents, they are relatively rarely detected in wastewater and activated sludge samples (Bailón-Pérez et al., 2008; Benito-Peña et al., 2006; Brown et al., 2006; Craig, 2003). A generally accepted interpretation is the proven instability of the beta-lactam ring and especially its susceptibility to hydrolysis (Hirsch et al., 1999). Nevertheless, the results of various studies have confirmed the presence of these antibiotics in WWTP systems. The highest concentration of penicillin G measured in raw sewage was 29 ng/L (Gulkowska et al., 2008), while in effluent, up to 300 ng/L of this antibiotic was detected (Watkinson et al., 2009). Available data for penicillin V indicated a maximum concentration as 13,800 ng/L in influent and 2000 ng/L in purified wastewater (Watkinson et al., 2007), whereas the highest measured concentration of amoxicillin was 6940 ng/L (Watkinson et al., 2009) and 1670 ng/L (Minh et al., 2009) in influent and effluent, respectively. Next, cloxacillin was determined in quantities of up to 4600 ng/L in raw sewage and 700 ng/L in wastewater after the purification process (Gulkowska et al., 2008). The highest concentration of cefalexin in influent was 64,000 ng/L (Watkinson et al., 2009), while up to 5070 ng/L of this compound was detected in effluent (Gulkowska et al., 2008). Furthermore, the highest concentration of cefaclor in raw wastewater was 6150 ng/L, and 1800 ng/L in treated wastewater (Watkinson et al., 2009).
The bacterial mechanisms of resistance to beta-lactams include altered permeability of the bacterial outer membrane for the drug through decrease in the number of porin channels and modification of the target (PBPs). The third possible mechanism of resistance, most common in Gram-negative bacteria, is inactivation of antibiotic by beta-lactamases (Zapun et al., 2008). The mechanism of antibiotic degradation by breaking the beta-lactam ring is represented by genes: amp, bla, oxa (Li et al., 2007). Particular resistance genes are located on different genetic elements, e.g. ampC on the chromosome, and ampR, blaTEM, blaCIT, blaFOX, blaCTX-M, oxa-2, and blaSHV on the plasmid. The information on resistance genes for this group of antibiotics detected in WWTPs is summarized in Table 1.
2.2. Macrolide resistance genes
Macrolides constitute a group of natural compounds characterized by the presence of a lactone ring, that is substituted with hydroxyl, alkyl and ketone groups. The mechanism of their action consists in inhibiting the early stages of protein synthesis by binding to the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome. They are usually used as substitutes for penicillins (Göbel et al., 2005b; McArdell et al., 2003). In the hospital sector, the average consumption of macrolides for systemic use was 0.15 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day, whereas the average consumption in the community was 3.0 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). Macrolide antibiotics are not metabolized in the body and consequently are excreted mainly via bile and faeces and end up into wastewater as unchanged parent compound (Nnadozie et al., 2017). Surprisingly, according to the available data, the macrolide which is most frequently detected in environmental samples is the main metabolite of erythromycin, erythromycin-H2O. This can be explained by the instability of this pharmaceutical under strongly acidic conditions used at the stage of sample preparation (pH 3), which directly contributes to the transformation of erythromycin into the metabolite, thus increasing its concentration in the analyzed samples (Göbel et al., 2004; Hirsch et al., 1999; McArdell et al., 2003; Yang and Carlson, 2004). The highest concentration of erythromycin-H2O detected in raw sewage was 10,025 ng/L (Kasprzyk-Hordern et al., 2009) and 4330 ng/L in treated wastewater (Minh et al., 2009). Whereas, the highest concentration of erythromycin was 830 ng/L and 620 ng/L in influent and effluent, respectively (Ternes et al., 2007). Next, tylosin was determined in quantities of up to 1150 ng/L (Yang and Carlson, 2004) in raw sewage, and 3400 ng/L (Watkinson et al., 2009) in wastewater after the purification process. The highest concentration of roxithromycin in influent was 810 ng/L, while in effluent up to 540 ng/L of this compound has been detected (Göbel et al., 2005a). Data for azithromycin indicated concentrations of up to 450 ng/L (Petrovic et al., 2006) in raw sewage and 400 ng/L (Göbel et al., 2005b) in treated wastewater. Clarithromycin was detected in influent and effluent at concentrations of 1433 ng/L (Lin et al., 2009) and 996 ng/L (Spongberg and Witter, 2008), respectively.
The best-known mechanism of bacterial resistance to macrolide antibiotics is based on the synthesis of metylase, whose function is to methylate 23S rRNA - the target site of the antibiotic's action (coded by erm genes). Mechanisms of lactone ring cleavage (coded by ere genes), antibiotic inactivation by modifying enzymes – macrolide phosphotransferases (MPH) (coded by genes e.g. mph(A), mph(B)) and active pumping the drug from the cell (coded by genes e.g. mefA, msrA) are also distinguished (Leclercq, 2002). Particular resistance genes are located in different genetic elements, e.g. ereA2 on integron, ermA, ermB, ermF on transposon, ereA, ereB, ermC and mph(A) on the plasmid. The data in Table 2 provide detailed information about particular macrolide resistance genes detected in WWTP systems.
2.3. Quinolone resistance genes
Quinolones and their derivatives - fluoroquinolones, which constitute a subset with the fluorine-substituted central ring, are a fully synthetic group of chemotherapeutic agents with antibacterial activity, in which four generations can be distinguished (Xiao et al., 2008). Compounds of this class inhibit two bacterial enzymes playing essential roles in bacterial DNA replication: DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV (Fàbrega et al., 2009). Quinolones are the fourth largest group used in human medicine (clinical use for the treatment of great variety of infections and for prophylactic purposes). Moreover, quinolones are widely used in veterinary practice, both for medical reasons and as growth promoters (Jacoby, 2005). They are the third largest group of chemotherapeutic agents accounting for 17% of the global market (Van Doorslaer et al., 2014). The consumption of quinolones for systemic use in the community sector was 1.7 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day, while in the hospital sector, the average consumption for systemic use was 0.23 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). Quinolones are predominantly excreted in unchanged form by urine (45–62%) and faeces (15–25%) and then discharged into hospital or municipal sewage (Kaplan et al., 2013). The consequence of widespread use of quinolones is their regular detection in WWTPs around the world. The highest concentration of norfloxacin in influent was 460 ng/L (Gulkowska et al., 2008; Seifrtová et al., 2008) and even to 3700 ng/L in treated wastewater (Minh et al., 2009). Research results for ciprofloxacin indicated a maximum concentration as 4600 ng/L in raw sewage (Watkinson et al., 2009) and 5600 ng/L in purified wastewater (Batt et al., 2006). The highest concentration of enrofloxacin in influent was 447 ng/L, while in effluent, up to 211 ng/L of this compound was identified (Seifrtová et al., 2008). The data for nalidixic acid mentioned the maximum concentration as 590 ng/L in raw sewage (Watkinson et al., 2007) and 200 ng/L in treated wastewater (Lin et al., 2008), whereas the highest ofloxacin concentration in raw wastewater was 1274 ng/L (Lin et al., 2009), and 7870 ng/L in effluent (Minh et al., 2009).
Two chromosomal quinolone resistance mechanisms are known: modifications of target enzymes (coded by genes e.g. gyrA, gyrB, parC), and decreased outer membrane permeability through porin changes and overexpression of efflux pomp (Lindberg et al., 2006). It has been found that quinolone resistance is also mediated by the qnr genes that encode proteins protecting DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV against quinolone compounds and are located on MGEs such as plasmids, which can potentially transfer genes in the HGT (Ruiz, 2003). Table 3 presents the list of resistance genes for this group of chemotherapeutic agents, which were identified in wastewater or activated sludge samples.
2.4. Sulfonamide and trimethoprim resistance genes
Sulfonamides and trimethoprim belong to the class of synthetic antimicrobial agents (Littlefield et al., 1990). Sulfonamides act selectively on bacteria as competitive inhibitors of the dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) enzyme, which is involved in the folic acid synthesis. Nowadays they are mainly used in veterinary practice in the treatment of bacterial and protozoal infections and as medicated feed additives. In human medicine sulfonamides have limited use, alone or mainly in combination with trimethoprim (dihydrofolate reductase inhibitor), in the treatment of uncomplicated respiratory, urinary tract and chlamydia infections. Some formulations are applied locally in eye and vaginal infections. Combined preparations with pyrimethamine are used in the treatment of drug-resistant malaria and toxoplasmosis (Finch et al., 2010). In the hospital sector, the average consumption of sulfonamides and trimethoprim for systemic use was 0.06 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day, whereas the average consumption in the community was 0.6 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). According to the available data, sulfonamides constituted 12% of total antibiotic consumption in Switzerland (Göbel et al., 2004) and 6% in China (Xu et al., 2007). These compounds are excreted in the urine mainly as metabolites, and in a small part as unchanged active parent compound (Nnadozie et al., 2017). The available research results indicate that the efficiency of the wastewater purification process for sulfonamides is 70–85%, besides they are relatively insoluble in water (Pedrouzo et al., 2011). Although the use of sulfonamides has drastically decreased since 1980, they are still present in the environment. As demonstrated in numerous studies, they were detected in WWTPs in Europe, North America, Australia and East Asia. The most frequently found compound was sulfamethoxazole, its maximum concentrations determined were: 5597 ng/L in raw sewage (Peng et al., 2008) and 6000 ng/L in treated wastewater (Batt et al., 2006). Whereas, the highest concentration of N4-acetylsulfamethoxazole - metabolite of sulfamethoxazole was 1600 ng/L (Göbel et al., 2005a) and 2200 ng/L (Hilton and Thomas, 2003) in influent and effluent, respectively. Next, sulfathiazole was determined in quantities of up to 531 ng/L (Choi et al., 2008) in raw sewage and 600 ng/L (Watkinson et al., 2009) in wastewater after the purification process. The highest concentration of sulfasalazine in influent was 100 ng/L, while in effluent up to 150 ng/L of this compound was detected (Watkinson et al., 2007). Data for sulfapyridine indicated concentrations of up to 1500 ng/L in raw sewage and 1000 ng/L (Chang et al., 2008a) in treated wastewater. Sulfacetamide was detected accordingly in influent and effluent as 210 ng/L (Karthikeyan and Meyer, 2006) and 363 ng/L (Xu et al., 2007). The highest concentration of sulfachloropyridazine in influent was 476 ng/L, while in effluent up to 149 ng/L of this compound was identified (Choi et al., 2008). The highest sulfadiazine amount in raw wastewater was 2900 ng/L and 960 ng/L in effluent (Chang et al., 2008b). Whereas the data about measured concentrations of trimethoprim in the aquatic environment reports that the presence of this compound was 38 ng/L in sewage treatment plant effluent (Alexy et al., 2006) and up to 24 ng/L in surface water (Sacher et al., 2001).
The mechanisms of resistance to sulfonamides are more diverse that those causing resistance to other antibiotics and include: metabolic alterations (overproduction of target enzyme or physiological metabolite (pAB)), mutational changes in the target enzyme which decrease its affinity for inhibitor, changes in cell permeability affecting the uptake of the drug, as well as the synthesis of novel, drug-resistant bypass-enzymes (Then, 1982). It is noteworthy that the resistance selected with a particular compound generally results in cross-resistance to other sulfonamides. SulI, sulII and sulIII genes, coding DHPS with lower affinity to sulfonamides, are mainly responsible for the resistance to sulfonamides. These genes are found on MGEs, both transposons and plasmids, in many different species of bacteria (Wang et al., 2014). In turn, increased synthesis of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) in bacterial cells may be the cause of resistance to trimethoprim. An example are mutants of E. coli, which synthesize the enzyme with activity 200-fold higher in comparison with the susceptible strains. Such mutations were observed in both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Although the trimethoprim resistance genes are found on chromosome usually the resistance to this drug is associated with the plasmid (Huovinen et al., 1995). Detailed data for the sulfonamide and trimethoprim resistance genes detected in WWTPs are collated in Table 4.
2.5. Tetracycline resistance genes
Tetracyclines are a group to which both natural (e.g. tetracycline, chlortetracycline, oxytetracycline) and semi-synthetic (e.g. doxycycline, demeclocycline) antibiotics belong. The mechanism of their action is based on inhibition of bacterial protein biosynthesis by binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit and preventing the association of aminoacyl-tRNA (Yang et al., 2005). Currently, they are only occasionally used in human medicine, but they have found widespread application in the treatment of livestock and aquaculture (Koesukwiwat et al., 2007; Miao et al., 2004; Sczesny et al., 2003). Tetracycline, chlortetracycline and oxytetracycline are used for this purpose more often than other antibiotics (Halling-Sørensen et al., 2003; Jeong et al., 2010; Lopez-Penalver et al., 2010). According to literature, >2500 tons of tetracycline in Europe and 1800 tons in the United States are used in veterinary every year (Halling-Sørensen et al., 2003; Simon, 2005). The consumption of tetracyclines for systemic use in the European hospital sector, expressed as the DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day was on the level of 2.0, while the average consumption of this class of antibiotics for systemic use in the community was 0.07 DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day (ECDC Annual epidemiological report for 2016, 2018). After the treatment process, over 70% of tetracycline antibiotics is excreted and released in an active form to the environment by urine or faeces of humans and animals. Due to highly hydrophilic character and low volatility they are very stable in the aquatic environment (Daghrir and Drogui, 2013). This group of compounds, especially tetracycline, is commonly detected in WWTPs. The highest concentration of tetracycline measured in raw sewage was 1300 ng/L (Gulkowska et al., 2008) and 1100 ng/L (Batt et al., 2007), while in effluent, up to 1420 ng/L of this antibiotic was identified (Minh et al., 2009). The data for oxytetracycline indicated a maximum concentration as 350 ng/L in influent (Watkinson et al., 2009) and 840 ng/L in purified wastewater (Minh et al., 2009), whereas the highest chlortetracycline detected concentration was 270 ng/L in raw wastewater (Yang et al., 2005) and 250 ng/L in effluent (Watkinson et al., 2009).
Bacterial resistance to tetracycline antibiotics is mediated mainly by two mechanisms: ribosome protection by large proteins coded by genes e.g. ortA, tetB(P), tetM, tetO, tetQ, tetS, tetT, tetW, tetX and reduction of intracellular drug concentration owing to export from the cell by membrane associated proteins coded by genes e.g. tetA, tetA(C), tetA(P), tetB, tetC, tetD, tetE, tetG, tetH, tetJ, tetK, tetL, tetV, tetY, tetZ. The third mechanism, involving the enzymatic inactivation of antibiotic (coded by gene tetX), is relatively rarely observed (Aminov, 2001). Tetracycline resistance genes can be found on a bacterial chromosome (e.g. tetA(P), tetA(2), tetJ, tetQ, tetV), plasmids (e.g. tetA, tetA(C), tetC, tetD, tetE, tetK, tetY) and transposones (e.g. tetB, tetH, tetM). In addition, some genes can be located both on the integron and chromosome (e.g. tetG) or on plasmid and chromosome (e.g. tetL) (Tuckman et al., 2007). Due to the proven presence of tetracyclines, also, as shown in the Table 5, the resistance genes for this group of antibiotics are commonly identified in the WWTP systems.
2.6. Multidrug resistance (MDR)
In the view of the presented problem, the prevalent occurrence and spread of antibiotic resistance, especially MDR, among bacterial pathogens may have serious consequences for human health and life as well as for the evolution of the environmental microflora (Levy and Bonnie, 2004; Martinez, 2009). Infections caused by pathogens, such as multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acinetobacter baumannii, are untreatable with available antibiotics in current medical practice (McGowan, 2006). Generally, there are two mechanisms for the formation of MDR. First of all, it can rely on the bacteria which accumulate many genes encoding resistance to a single drug, and it mainly concerns plasmids and transposons. It is also possible to operate multidrug efflux pumps, which can remove a wide range of pharmaceuticals from the cell (Nikaido, 2009). One of the most important factors that select multiresistant bacterial strains is the unreasonable and improper use of specific groups of antibiotics, including antibiotics primarily reserved for selected types of infections, and/or last chance antibiotics (e.g. carbapenems). An important risk factor is also high doses of antibiotics used in hospitals, which have a strongly selective effect on the appearance and maintenance of multiresistant bacteria (McGowan, 2006). According to available data, MDR is associated primarily with the hospital environment, but as evidenced by the confirmed presence of resistance determinants in the sewage after the treatment process at discharge points, transfer of genes between bacteria living in different habitats, including WWTPs, is also possible (Goni-Urriza et al., 2000; Guardabassi et al., 2002; Reinthaler et al., 2003; Schlüter et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2009a). Table 6 presents a list of multidrug efflux pomp genes detected in wastewater or activated sludge samples.
3. WWTPs as potential hotspots for ARGs dissemination
Based on the culture-dependent methods, it was observed that antibiotic-resistant bacterial species most frequently detected in WWTP samples belong to the common indicators of faecal contamination: E. coli, total coliforms, and enterococci. However, in addition to these bacteria, a wide variety of clinically important ARB have been detected, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus spp., and Gram-negative bacteria (e.g. Enterobacteria, Pseudomonas, and Acinetobacter) (Bouki et al., 2013; Figueira et al., 2011; Goni-Urriza et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2009b). Most of the examined enterococci isolates were resistant to many different antibiotics. Amador et al. (2015) reported the resistance to 13 antibiotics in Enterobacteriaceae isolated from WWTP samples. Their results revealed high frequency of resistance to beta-lactams (cefoxitin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid combination, cefotaxime, aztreonam, cefpirome, ceftazidime) but also to trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and ciprofloxacin. Numerous studies have been conducted on the antimicrobial resistance profile of E. coli originating from WWTPs. High resistance rates were observed for aminopenicillins, sulphonamides, and tetracycline, whereas comparatively lower rates are reported for quinolones (Ferreira da Silva et al., 2006; Łuczkiewicz et al., 2010).
Metagenomic analyses have shown that genera such as Enterococcus or Escherichia, often targeted in antibiotic resistance culture-dependent studies in WWTPs, are not detected among the most abundant groups. Proteobacteria followed by Firmicutes and Actinobacteria and members of the genera Aeromonas, Bacillus, Lysinibacillus, Microbacterium, Providencia, and Staphylococcus were predominant bacteria detected in both influent and effluent of WWTP samples (Zhang et al., 2015a).
Resistance genes for antibiotics belonging to different groups have been detected in WWTPs with conventional treatment processes using different molecular methods (Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6). Yang et al. (2014) demonstrated significant reduction in ARGs in WWTP effluent after the wastewater treatment process. Using metagenomic sequencing, the authors revealed that, compared to the influent, >98% of ARGs was removed from effluent. A significant decrease in the number of ARGs, after the wastewater treatment process with only activated sludge application was also reported in some other studies (Hultman et al., 2018; Laht et al., 2014). At the same time other authors reported enrichment of some resistance genes in the effluent (Alexander et al., 2015; Amador et al., 2015; Bengtsson-Palme et al., 2016). Alexander et al. (2015) showed that WWTPs are not designed to remove ARGs. They observed the increase in the abundance of some ARGs (ampC, blaVIM) in the bacterial population after conventional wastewater treatment. Similarly, enrichment of three resistance genes (blaCTX-M, tetB, and dfrA3) were reported in the effluent samples collected in WWTPs in Sweden (Bengtsson-Palme et al., 2016).
WWTPs are believed to be probable hotspots for ARB and ARG spread. Some studies available in the scientific literature show that biological processes may positively affect ARB spread and selection as well as ARG transfer (Auerbach et al., 2007; Ferreira da Silva et al., 2006; Łuczkiewicz et al., 2010). The persistent selective pressure from antibiotic residues at sub-inhibitory concentrations, as well as high density and diversity of microorganisms (including pathogenic, commensal, environmental and indigenous) sustained by a nutrient rich environment create favourable conditions for antibiotic resistance dissemination (Rizzo et al., 2013). WWTP sludge was recognized as the main source of tetracycline- and sulfonamide-resistant bacteria and genes discharged into the water environment (Munir et al., 2011). Thirty ARGs encoding resistance to tetracycline, sulphonamides, quinolones, or macrolides were identified by qPCR from the activated sludge of two WWTPs in China (Mao et al., 2015). Significant enrichment of ten ARGs (tetB, tetG, tetH, tetS, tetT, tetX, sulI, sulII, qnrB, and ermC) in relation to the 16S rRNA was observed.
An increasing occurrence of ARB or ARGs does not demonstrate that the gene transfer had occurred. The location of ARGs on MGEs, such as plasmids, transposons, and integrons, makes the transfer of resistance possible and easy to achieve among bacteria with the same or different origins (Allen et al., 2010). Thus, detecting MGEs together with specific ARGs may provide a global perspective on antibiotic resistance and ARG spread (Lupo et al., 2012). Mobile elements such as plasmids, transposons and integrons carrying ARGs, have been detected/isolated in wastewater and/or activated sludge samples from WWTPs (Guo et al., 2017; Szczepanowski et al., 2009; Zhuang et al., 2015). Recent studies indicate that phages and phage-derived particles, among others, could play a role in the spread of ARGs in the environment. The prevalence of ARGs, particularly in the bacteriophage fraction, poses the threat of the spread of ARGs and their incorporation into a new bacterial background that could lead to the emergence of new resistant clones (Calero-Cáceres and Muniesa, 2016).
It seems that the dynamics of ARGs is different from the fate of bacteria. Although wastewater treatment processes reduced the number of bacteria even up to 99%, the increased abundances of ARGs in the effluent was documented (Alexander et al., 2015; Biswal et al., 2014; Korzeniewska et al., 2013). As a consequence, the downstream surface water and also some groundwater compartments received high abundances of ARGs. It was reported that, despite the significant reduction in bacterial numbers, >2.7 × 103 CFU/mL E. coli reached the receiving river water and from among 38 strains isolated, up to 18% were extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producers (Korzeniewska et al., 2013).
Hospital sewage is a special problem. Comparing the antibiotic resistance profiles from different sampling sites, various authors observed that the hospital effluent showed higher rates of resistance to all antibiotics. E. coli isolated from hospital sewage had a higher antibiotic resistance rate than E. coli isolated from municipal sewage (Korzeniewska and Harnisz, 2013; Korzeniewska et al., 2013). High abundances of opportunistic bacteria (Enterococcus faecium/faecalis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative staphyloccoci) and medically relevant ARGs (blaVIM-1, vanA, ampC, ermB, and mecA) were quantified in clinical wastewaters and influents of the adjacent WWTPs in Germany (Alexander et al., 2015). Hospital effluents carry significant quantities of antibiotic-resistant enteric bacteria to municipal sewage. Enterobacteriaceae, being natural microbiota of the human gastrointestinal tract, represent a large part of bacterial communities of hospital effluents and can be a source of genes encoding beta-lactamases and ESBLs. Korzeniewska and Harnisz (2013) and Korzeniewska et al. (2013) reported that from among 167 and 147 E. coli strains isolated from hospital effluents and municipal sewage, up to 37% and 18%, respectively, were ESBL-positive. Similar results were obtained by Chagas et al. (2011) who observed the prevalence of ESBL-producers in >40% of all Gram-negative strains isolated from hospital sewage. Some authors suggested that preliminary disinfection of hospital sewage before its inflow into the sewage system might minimize the spreading of ARB to the environment (Korzeniewska et al., 2013). According to Amador et al. (2015), the resistance to meropenem and imipenem is restricted to isolates from hospital effluents. This result can be explained by the fact that antibiotics of carbapanem class are mainly used in hospitals as a last resort to treat patients with severe infections.
4. Influence of advanced treatment processes on ARGs in effluents
Regulations concerning wastewater quality are currently based on chemical discharges. In addition to secondary and tertiary wastewater treatment processes, which were primarily designed to remove nitrogen, well biodegradable organic compounds, ammonia, nitrate, and phosphate, the application of advanced wastewater cleaning processes is necessary to efficiently eliminate microbiological contaminants (Sharma et al., 2016). Different methods including conventional disinfectants (chlorine and ozone) and advanced oxidation processes (UV, Fenton-reaction, solar-driven Fenton oxidation, and photocatalytical oxidation) in the context of their application in wastewater treatment and impact on ARGs has been investigated in real systems or on the pilot scale (Table 7). Alexander et al. (2016) studied the impact of the ozone treatment system on opportunistic bacteria (enterococci, P. aeruginosa, staphylococci, and enterobacteria) in wastewater after the conventional cleaning process. Certain differences in the sensitivity of some species to ozone treatment with high susceptibility of enterococci were observed. In contrast to 99% reduction in abundance of enterococci, an increase (42%) in abundance of P. aeruginosa was noted. Moreover, the polymerase chain reaction-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) analysis and 16S amplicon sequencing confirmed the occurrence of a selection-like process in combination with substantial diversity loss within the wastewater population after ozone treatment. Especially the survival of GC-rich bacteria was demonstrated (due to the reduced reactivity of guanine-rich DNA to ozone treatment compared to thymine-rich DNA and to the fact that their DNA structure contains more hydrogen bonds). The evaluation of the antibiotic resistance situation showed that the ozone treatment affected the abundances of studied ARGs differently; the erythromycin (ermB) resistance gene was reduced by 2 orders of magnitude, but simultaneously, the abundance of two other clinically relevant resistance genes (to vancomycin (vanA) and imipemem (blaVIM)) increased within the surviving population. The antibiotic resistance vanA and blaVIM genes are located on highly mobile genetic elements (Tn1546 and Tn402, respectively) and are reported to be transferable, even between different species. The mode of action of the ozone treatment involves inactivation of bacteria by DNA damages, which in turn leads to the induction of HGT by the recA system. It has been shown that the ozonation and ultraviolet (UV254 nm) radiation significantly reduced the abundance of total heterotrophs, enterobacteria, and enterococci. For both types of treatments, the contact time of 30 min was sufficient to remove 96.13–99.97% of bacteria under investigation. In the same study it was observed that the ozonation and UV radiation reduced the abundance of ARGs (vanA, blaTEM, sulI and qnrS) and of intI1 per volume of wastewater. However, the normalization to 16S rRNA evidenced an increase of ARGs and intI1 prevalence, mainly after UV treatment (Sousa et al., 2017). Different responses of ARB and ARGs to UV disinfection were also found in the other study (Lee et al., 2017): the removal efficiencies of ARB were observed in the range of 34–75%, while obvious reduction of ARGs was not observed at the UV dose of 27 mJ/cm2. This is in agreement with the results obtained earlier by Auerbach et al. (2007) who showed no significant decrease in levels of tetQ and tetG in UV treated effluent. Only little ARG removal was observed in the studies performed by Munir et al. (2011), who reported that UV disinfection in a full-scale WWTPs in the USA did not contribute significantly to the reduction of tetW, tetO and sulI gene abundance. The authors concluded that much higher UV dose than the dose (27 mJ/cm2) applied was required for ARG reduction. According to Mao et al. (2015), high irradiation intensities are necessary to remove ARGs from wastewater. It was reported that a UV dose of 200–400 mJ/cm2 was needed to significantly reduce ARGs in a phosphate-buffered saline and filtered-wastewater matrix (McKinney and Pruden, 2012). Taking into account that UV light is partially absorbed by organic and inorganic matter present in wastewater, the efficiency of ARG abundance reduction in a full-scale WWTPs could be even lower (Munir et al., 2011). Different sensitivity of ARB to UV radiation was observed. At lower UV fluences (5 or 10 mJ/cm2), a decrease of the proportion of erythromycin-resistant bacteria and an increase of that of tetracycline-resistant bacteria were observed in wastewater, while UV at dose of 50 mJ/cm2 successfully removed both types of ARB (Guo et al., 2013).
In the study of wastewater treatment using chlorination alone, the resistance to nine antibiotics (cephalexin, ciprofloxacin, chloramphenicol, erythromycin, gentamicin, rifampicin, sulfadiazine, tetracycline and vancomycin) was examined (Yuan et al., 2015). Significant reduction in bacterial numbers was observed without differences in susceptibility of various ARB to chlorination. A detailed qPCR examination of erythromycin (ereA, ereB, ermA, ermB) and tetracycline resistance genes (tetA, tetB, tetM, and tetO) in wastewater showed that chlorination was not able to eliminate ARGs effectively (Yuan et al., 2015). Some authors observed different susceptibility of resistant and non-resistant bacteria to chlorination. Mao et al. (2015) reported that ARB persisted through all treatment units of WWTPs, and survived disinfection by chlorination in greater percentages. Although the absolute abundances of ARGs were reduced from the raw influent to the effluent by 89.0% - 99.8%, considerable ARG levels were found in WWTP effluent samples. In the comparison with the influent, the concentrations of twelve ARGs (tetA, tetB, tetE, tetG, tetH, tetS, tetT, tetX, sulI, sulII, qnrB, ermC) in the effluent were higher, indicating overall proliferation of resistant bacteria (Mao et al., 2015). In turn, according to Quach-Cu et al. (2018) there was no evidence for positive selection of ARGs during sequential chlorination applied in a full-scale tertiary stage WWTPs. The authors observed significant reduction in concentrations of sulI and blaSHV/TEM genes in a final effluent after treatment. Zhang et al. (2015b) investigated the influence of different disinfection methods (chlorination, UV and sequential UV/chlorination) on ARGs (sulI, tetX, tetG, int1) and demonstrated positive relationship between inactivation of ARGs and dosage of chlorine and contact time. Also, the increase in the intensity of UV irradiation increased the effectiveness of ARG inactivation. The sequential UV/chlorination enhanced the inactivation of ARGs. The authors concluded that maximum synergistic effect may need optimizing dosages of chlorine and UV irradiation. However, some inactivation of all studied genes was observed. In the later study, the reduction of the sul1, tetX, tetG, and int1 genes in an urban secondary effluent treated with Fenton oxidation at a bench scale was assessed. The results of this study showed a 2.6–3.8 log removal of the target genes at the molar ratio of Fe2+/H2O2 of 0.1 at pH 3 after 2 h (Zhang et al., 2016a). Ferro et al. (2016) studied the effect of the advanced oxidation process (specifically UV/H2O2) on the antibiotic resistance transfer potential and possible removal of target ARGs (blaTEM, qnrS and tetW). In spite of bacterial inactivation and the decrease of ARGs in intracellular DNA, the UV/H2O2 process was not effective in ARG removal. While no difference was found for qnrS gene, an increase of blaTEM gene was observed in total DNA after 240 min of UV/H2O2 treatment. The insensitivity of blaTEM gene to UV/H2O2 disinfection was confirmed by qPCR in the later study (Ferro et al., 2017).
The study of the efficiency of MBR integrated with solar Fenton oxidation in removal of ARB, performed at a pilot scale, showed complete inactivation of antibiotic-resistant cultivable bacteria examined (E. coli, Klebsiella spp. and P. aeruginosa) (Karaolia et al., 2017). The authors explained that very low bacterial counts in the MBR effluent resulted from the high removal potential exhibited by the physical filtration - the size-exclusion step of the MBR. Furthermore, the study clearly demonstrated the high efficiency of the MBR (>99%) for the removal of both, total bacteria and antibiotic-tolerant bacteria. Moreover, the subsequent solar Fenton oxidation resulted in complete inactivation of the remaining bacteria. Despite high efficiency of the investigated advanced wastewater treatment technology, observed in terms of removing bacteria the ARGs (ampC, sulI and ermB) were still present (Karaolia et al., 2017). In turn, Munir et al. (2011) observed significant difference in ARG removal between conventional wastewater treatment methods and MBR for tetW, tet O and 16S rRNA genes. The findings of that study showed that the MBR facility provided the highest removal efficiency for most of the ARGs from the wastewater.
Photocatalytic ozonation in continuous mode with TiO2-coated glass Raschig rings and light emitting diodes (LEDs) was observed to efficiently remove total heterotrophic bacteria and bacteria resistant to ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, and meropenem from urban wastewaters. The application of this treatment resulted in ARG (blaTEM, qnrS and sulI) reduction to levels below/close to the quantification limit (qPCR) (Moreira et al., 2016). Venieri et al. (2017), evaluated the photocatalysis with metal-doped titania (Mn-, Co- and binary Mn/Co-TiO2) under artificial and natural sunlight, chlorination and UV-C irradiation for their potential to influence the antibiotic resistance profile and inactivate target ARGs in wastewater. The obtained results showed that relative activity of the tested methods for K. pneumoniae inactivation was decreased in the order: photocatalysis with metal-doped titania (Mn-, Co- and binary Mn/Co-TiO2) under artificial light > chlorination with dose of 5 mg/L of free chlorine > UV-C irradiation, at an initial bacterial concentration of 107 CFU/mL. The high level of antibiotic resistance, reflecting the abundance of the corresponding target ARGs (tetA, tetM, sulI, blaTEM, and ampC) was observed after the tested treatments. Among the employed methods, UV-C irradiation affected the presence of the target ARGs to a considerable extent.
Calero-Cáceres and Muniesa (2016) investigated the persistence of three ARGs (blaTEM, blaCTX-M and sulI) that naturally occur in the bacterial and phage fractions of raw wastewater at different temperatures (4 °C, 22 °C and 37 °C) and pH values (3, 7 and 9), as well as after various disinfection treatments (thermal treatment, chlorination, and UV) and natural inactivation in a mesocosm. After all these treatments, the ARGs persisted for a long time with minimal reductions. In general, they showed greater persistence in the bacteriophage fraction than in the bacterial fraction. Comparisons showed that the ARGs persisted in conditions that reduced culturable E. coli and infectious coliphages below the limit of detection.
The presented research results show that the effectiveness of different advanced treatment technologies in ARB removal is comparable to the conventional treatment. It seems that conventional disinfectants and advanced oxidation processes or their combinations disturb bacterial cells, but in most cases, they are not able to completely remove or significantly reduce the quantities of ARGs. This finding also implies that to understand the prevalence and fate of antibiotic resistance, it is necessary to monitor not only ARB but especially ARGs. Moreover, people should be aware that some of wastewater treatment methods could increase the antibiotic resistance of surviving bacteria, and serve as important reservoirs for the spread of antibiotic resistance to opportunistic pathogens if the treatment processes were not effective.
5. Necessary actions to limit the spread of antibiotic resistance
The highly probable spread of MDR through WWTPs is particularly worrying due to therapeutic limitations and the resulting threat to human health and life. Therefore, intense efforts should be made to find solutions to control antibiotic resistance problem in the environment. Considering that agricultural applications of antibiotics represent a large percentage of their overall consumption worldwide, the appropriate direction of action is to limit the use of antimicrobials in animal production. Furthermore, in many countries, regulations of reclaimed wastewater use in agriculture have been introduced. However, these regulations should concern not only some chemical characteristics and threshold of the pathogenic microorganism presence, but also other antibiotic resistance determinants. Another important aspect is the rationalization of antibacterial compounds use in medicine. Action in this area, on the community level, should include education and motivation of both, medical sector employees and patients. People should be aware that appropriate management of medical waste, vaccination, or hygiene are as necessary to restrict the spread of infection as the need to reduce the consumption of antibiotics. As the conventional wastewater treatment processes are not effective in reduction of antibiotic resistance, it seems indispensable to develop new technological solutions which will help to reduce antibiotic resistance determinants in WWTP effluents. A reasonable solution for increasing wastewater treatment process efficiency is the upgrading of WWTPs with additional advanced treatments. Based on the available scientific reports, the MBR technology seems particularly promising as an alternative technology to conventional activated sludge treatment. In addition to its worth emphasizing advantages, such as high biodegradation capacity and efficiency, as well as low sludge production, MBR technology significantly removes suspended solids (>99%) and thus enhances the efficiency of further applied processes. The increase in efficiency has been attributed to the removal of light-scattering solids which reduce bacterial removal efficiency of such methods as UV treatment or photocatalysis. Moreover, these solids have been shown to agglomerate with wastewater bacteria, providing them with physical protection against applied treatment. Finally, effectiveness of MBR in elimination of microorganisms and significant reduction of ARGs has been documented. Also, photocatalytic ozonation in continuous mode with TiO2-coated glass Raschig rings and light emitting diodes (LEDs) which, as it was reported, efficiently removed both ARB and ARGs seems to be a good technological solution for the future. Taking into consideration ozonation or UV treatments, additional modifications (e.g. higher ozone concentrations/contact time, higher irradiation intensities) or process combinations are needed to increase the bactericidal effect and to improve ARG removal efficiency. Such integration of different technologies aims to increase effectiveness against a larger variety of microorganisms and, consequently, to improve of final effluent quality in comparison to conventionally treated wastewater. Also, adequate management of hospital wastewater, being the main source of microbial contamination, is required. To reduce the dissemination of pathogenic ARB in the environment, initial disinfection of hospital influents is highly recommended. It is also important to implement the aforementioned strategies to regional management in order to achieve a satisfactory effect in minimizing the antibiotic resistance problem at the national and global level.
6. Conclusions
The available data is a reliable confirmation that wastewater and WWTPs are hotspots for the spread of antibiotic resistance in the environment. The information collected and presented in this review article is an evidence of presence of beta-lactam, macrolide, quinolone, sulfonamide, trimethoprim and tetracycline resistance as well as multidrug efflux genes in municipal, hospital and appropriate industrial wastewater in the European countries, USA, Canada, China, Korea and Turkey. The persistent selective pressure from antibiotic residues at sub-inhibitory concentrations, as well as high density and diversity of microorganisms sustained by a nutrient rich environment in WWTPs (especially in activated sludge) create favourable conditions for selection and proliferation of ARB and ARG transfer. The effectiveness of conventional treatment processes in removing antibiotic resistance determinants has been repeatedly undermined. Some authors, based on observed reduction in bacterial number and enrichment of some resistance genes in the effluent, claim that the treatment processes are capable of significant reduction of ARB but are not efficient in ARG elimination. On the other hand, significant ARG removal after the wastewater treatment process with only activated sludge application was reported in some other studies. However, the fact is that both ARB (also pathogens that pose a potential threat to human health and life) and ARGs (including genes conferring resistance to last resort antibiotics) are present in the WWTP effluents. Thus, use of the wastewater treatment based solely on biological processes can possibly promote the spread of antibiotic resistance in the environment. In the current situation, it seems necessary to develop and introduce new technological solutions that will increase the efficiency of wastewater treatment, especially in terms of elimination of microbiological contaminants. Available research results show that the effectiveness of conventional disinfectants (chlorine and ozone), UV treatment, and Fenton oxidation in ARG removal is negligible. Although it was observed that higher concentrations of disinfectant/intensity of UV irradiation and longer contact/exposure time positively affected ARG inactivation efficiency, the problem is that the conditions applied on a laboratory scale cannot be used in full scale WWTPs. According to documented high efficiency in ARB and ARG removal, the MBR technology (as an alternative technology to conventional activated sludge treatment) and photocatalytic ozonation with TiO2-coated glass Raschig rings and light LEDs seem to be a good technological solutions for the future. It is worth to emphasise that, in addition to advantages, such as high biodegradation capacity and efficiency, as well as low sludge production, the MBR technology significantly removes suspended solids and thus enhances the efficiency of further applied processes. In addition to a more efficient wastewater treatment process, it seems necessary to perform permanent microbiological monitoring taking into account the antibiotic resistance aspect, along with increased control of medicine intake and appropriate management of medical waste.

