Abstract
The occurrence of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes in riverine systems has become a growing concern worldwide. Risk prediction of antibiotic resistance is difficult as the continuous addition of new antibiotics complicate the antibiotic resistome. As rivers flow with heavy antibiotic burdens, antibiotic resistance develops rapidly and disseminates into various environmental compartments. The analysis of antibiotic contamination-driven resistance in global rivers provides a clear picture of the consequences in the near future. In this review, an extensive literature survey along with the analysis on the relevant data was carried out to offer a better knowledge on the global trend of antibiotic resistance. Although the most common resistance was reported against tetracycline and sulfonamide class of antibiotics, the trend of resistance against advanced generation antibiotics such as β-lactam is alarming. Furthermore, non-therapeutic use of antibiotics as growth promoters has become more frequent than clinical use as a major driver of resistance dissemination. Mechanistically, integrons and mobile genetic elements are suggested as one of the important media for resistance gene transfer. Considering the significance of this emerging issue, special emphasis is placed on the sources, fate, and possible management strategies to mitigate the threat of antibiotic resistance. This review covers the environmental footprints of the antibiotic contamination-mediated emergence and dissemination of antibiotic resistant bacteria and genes in global rivers. As such, the distribution pattern of antibiotic contamination and resistance determinants in various rivers worldwide has been described with a note of its long term impact. The information presented in this review may be useful to policy makers, clinicians, and pharmaceutical companies to tackle the epidemiology of antibiotic resistance as a global threat.
The presence of pharmaceutical substances in the natural environment is a global challenge (Aus der Beek et al., 2016). Antibiotic contamination is rapidly increasing in the natural environment primarily due to the heavy and widespread use of antibiotics worldwide (Klein et al., 2018; Martínez, 2008). Furthermore, poor wastewater treatment strategies in various settings facilitates the evolution and dissemination of antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in effluent receiving aquatic reservoirs (Rodriguez-Mozaz et al., 2015; Xu et al., 2015). As such, the presence of antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs has been observed in various rivers worldwide (Jia et al., 2017). Nearly all classes of antibiotics and a wide range of ARB and ARGs have been reported in various environmental samples including river water and sediment, groundwater, and drinking water (Martínez, 2008; Schwartz et al., 2003). At many instances, the individual concentration of antibiotics in any given system may be low while their combination (at the same concentrations) may exert more significant effects (Shao et al., 2018). Thus, it is critically important to remember that for the mixture of antibiotic residues cumulative effect might be different. Antibiotic resistance is the ability of bacteria to resist and escape from the effects of anti-bacterial medication that was once effective to treat the bacteria. If antibiotics are continuously released to natural aquatic environments, it may exert selective pressure in bacterial population to acquire antibiotic resistance for their survival (Martínez, 2008). Such resistance is developed or introduced in bacteria through various methods such as mutational resistance, horizontal gene transfer, efflux-mediated resistance, and/or alteration in the target sites. Integrons (primarily classes 1, 2, and 3) are one of the major players in the dissemination of antibiotic resistance. Integrons are mostly carried on mobile genetic elements such as plasmids or transposons while containing gene cassettes to encode antibiotic resistance (Deng et al., 2015). Thus, plasmids and transposons are the most important mobile genetic elements which may harbor and further disseminate a diverse range of antibiotic resistance genes (Munita and Arias, 2016). Since rivers and lakes are widely used as resources for drinking water (Xi et al., 2009), irrigational, and recreational purposes (Liu et al., 2018), the entry of antibiotics and the resulting growth of antibiotic resistance genes/bacteria in those systems make their management more complicated (Schwartz et al., 2003). Although the root causes of such problems are diverse, the major settings responsible for direct/indirect antibiotic spillage include pharmaceutical industries, hospitals, aquaculture, and agriculture. Wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) are another major reservoir as they provide a microenvironment where ARB and ARGs become evolved in response to prolonged antibiotic load. The load of ARB and ARGs in waste water effluents varies depending upon the capacity and efficiency of the treatment plant (Karkman et al., 2018; Manaia et al., 2018). The removal of ARB and ARGs from WWTPs has thus become a major challenge as none of the available techniques are completely efficient (Bouki et al., 2013). Reactivation of ARB even after disinfection is another risk factor particularly in drinking water (Huang et al., 2011). Reports suggest that antibiotic resistance is spreading at an alarming rate worldwide (Ferri et al., 2017). Worldwide, at least 0.7 million deaths/year is estimated on account of issues related to antibiotic resistance which is estimated to be 10 million by 2050 (O'neill, 2014). According to an estimate, global consumption of antibiotics lies between 100, 000 to 200, 000 ton/annum while annual consumption of more than 25,000 tons is accounted for by China alone (Van Boeckel et al., 2015). The inappropriate usage of antibiotics stimulated rapid emergence of ARB and ARGs, diminishing their therapeutic potential against the human and animal pathogens. Unfortunately, resistance has eventually been developed to most of the common antibiotics as many of bacterial infections are once again untreatable or requiring next generation antibiotics (Phumart et al., 2012). In the context of global public health, widespread dissemination of antibiotic resistance is a major concern with a shortage of related treatment options (Gillings et al., 2008; Lawe-Davies and Bennett, 2017). The global reach of antibiotic resistance determinants is evident based on their presence in environments ranging from river sediments to arctic marine sediments (Tan et al., 2018). Furthermore, a very recent report on isolation of multi-drug resistant Enterobacter bugandensis spp. from the International Space Station has confirmed its ubiquitous nature (Singh et al., 2018). Antibiotic resistance itself is not surprising as the intrinsic resistance mechanism of bacteria against natural antibiotics is well documented. However, rapidly increasing resistance towards the third and fourth generation antibiotics is worrisome (Livermore, 1995). Moreover, rapid emergence of resistance demands the development of newer classes of antibiotics and disturbs the global economy as well. Thus, the management of this rapidly emerging threat is inevitable for the protection of human and environmental health. Most importantly, the currently available literature on antibiotic resistance in global riverine system is limited and scattered. Therefore, it is of great significance to carry out an inclusive review to understand the global pattern of resistance in such major environmental compartments. Here, we review the distribution of antibiotics, ARB and ARGs in various global rivers with an approach to tackle the epidemiology of antibiotic resistance as a global threat. Additionally, major sources of the antibiotic contamination and mechanism of antibiotic-induced proliferation of resistant genes are also discussed. Based on our literature search and analysis, we offer a comprehensive review that systematically compiles the spatial distribution of antibiotics, ARB and ARGs in various rivers worldwide.
Wastewater from various sources such as hospitals, industry, agriculture, aquaculture, and animal production acts as a major reservoir of ARB and ARGs. Inefficient wastewater treatment substantially contributes to the dissemination of antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs in receiving rivers. Extended-spectrum b-lactamases (ESBL) are enzymes produced by certain bacteria that confer resistance to most b-lactam antibiotics such as penicillins, cephalosporins, and the monobactam aztreonam. Another resistance which is being increasingly reported is plasmid mediated quinolone resistance (PMQR). The dominance of ESBL and PMQR bacteria has been reported from hospital and waste water effluent and its receiving rivers (Conte et al., 2017; Korzeniewska and Harnisz, 2013). Prevalence of Escherichia coli harboring similar resistant determinants (ESBL and PMQR) was also reported from various effluent sources (e.g., urban stream, municipal, and hospital effluents). In addition to clinically resistant isolates, veterinary isolates have also been frequently detected in last few decades most likely due to heavy usage of respective antibiotics which demands better practices and preventive measures to control the dissemination of such resistant determinants into the environment (Varela et al., 2015). It was suggested that sewage treatment plants may serve as a major reservoir of ARB and ARGs (Xu et al., 2015). Alarmingly, the concentration of resistant isolates is usually detected to be the highest in the final effluent, which is most likely due to the substantially high selective pressure inside the WWTP (Mokracka et al., 2012). Reports suggest that even a small amount of routinely administered sewage effluent has the potential to increase antibiotic resistance in an aquatic ecosystem (Lehmann et al., 2016). According to a metagenomic analysis, an interplay of ARB, ARGs and MGEs inside the WWTP can facilitate the transfer of resistance gene among diverse bacterial spp. (Guo et al., 2017b; Jha et al., 2017; Osinska et al., 2017 ). A strong positive correlation between ARG diversity and plasmid diversity clearly indicates the role of plasmids in ARG exchange (Ma et al., 2014). Furthermore, the dissemination of sewage effluent driven resistance is mediated most likely through integrons. Moreover, nutrient load, antibiotics, and MGEs in an aquatic environment eventually contribute to a synergistic increase in the amount of ARB and ARGs (Lehmann et al., 2016). In most of previous reports, final wastewater effluents have been reported to contain an abundance of ARB and ARGs, most likely due to the cumulative effect of inefficient treatment processes and heavy antibiotic loads inside the treatment plant. Further, effluent receiving aquatic ecosystem becomes reservoir in long-term to act as secondary dissemination platform for other connected aquatic and terrestrial compartments. In line with the above-mentioned facts, the relative abundance of class 1 integrons and ARGs (tet and sul) in final effluents eventually led to considerably high concentrations of resistance determinants in the Zimny Potok River, Poland (Makowska et al., 2016). The copy number of tetA and sul1 gene was positively correlated with salinity whereas tetA copy number was positively correlated with total dissolved solids. The continuous and interconnected flow of ecotoxicological contaminants in various ecological compartments raised a serious concern to warrant the need for technological advancement in WWTPs (Makowska et al., 2016). Furthermore, antibiotic production plants are a major source of antibiotic spillage to the atmosphere, which subsequently leads to the occurrence and emergence of ARB and ARGs. In general, an increase in the particular antibiotic level is positively correlated with the abundance of related ARGs in that particular micro/macroenvironment. At a drug formulation facility in Pakistan, the concentrations of ARGs, sul1, and dfrA1 were directly correlated with the corresponding concentrations of antibiotics, sulfamethoxazole, and trimethoprim (Khan et al., 2013). Countries with large meat production industries (such as China) use an enormous amount of antibiotics in animal farms. This source is speculated to be one of the major reasons for antibiotic loads in receiving rivers, which subsequently propagate a diverse range of ARB and ARGs (Van Boeckel et al., 2014, 2015). Further, as animal feedlots are also a major hotspot for the accumulation and dissemination of ARGs, the use of their waste as a bio-fertilizer in agricultural farms poses a risk to human health (He et al., 2016). Aquatic ecosystems in close proximity to aquaculture farms undergo a similar pattern of resistance dissemination. For example, increased incidences of the tetracycline resistance gene in the Drweca River, Poland were attributed to the usage of antibiotics in riverside aquaculture farms (Harnisz et al., 2015). Alarmingly, fish from polluted waters were found to harbor ESBL resistant determinants (with the prevalence of blaCTX-M) and integrons (with prevalence of class 1) containing bacteria (Marathe et al., 2016). In another similar study, Enterococcus isolates from Nile tilapia fish were reported to have vancomycin A and vancomycin B resistance genes to support a mode of ecological and human health hazard mediated by antibiotics (Osman et al., 2016). Although reports on ARB and ARG contamination in the groundwater are scarce, improper solid waste disposal, especially clinical wastes, may contaminate groundwater by leaching through soil layers. Reports from Hyderabad, India demonstrated contamination of surface, ground, and drinking water near pharmaceutical industries (Fick et al., 2009). Considerably high concentrations of a wide range of antibiotics indicated poor wastewater management and negligence of the associated risks. (Fick et al., 2009). The La Paz River of Bolivia is prone to receive polluted urban runoff in the Andean highlands. Land and vegetables irrigated from this river water has been found to be contaminated with multiple antibiotic resistant enteropathogens (Poma et al., 2016). If rivers receiving polluted runoff or wastewaters are used for agricultural, drinking, and recreational purposes, it may transmit waterborne and food borne diseases (Poma et al., 2016). Higher antibiotic loads in wastewater tend to increase the abundance and overexpression of ARGs in effluent, which may further accumulate bacterial resistome (Rowe et al., 2017).
Several classes of antibiotics are used worldwide for the treatment of bacterial infections in a diverse range of diseases (Nigam et al., 2014). Despite their worldwide use, the amount of reliable quantitative data is not sufficiently large. However, according to an estimate, the sum of non-therapeutic antibiotic consumption in livestock (cows, buffalo, etc.) and food animals (chickens, pigs, etc.) is far higher than that by humans (Van Boeckel et al., 2014, 2015). 1486 R. Singh et al. / Journal of Cleaner Production 234 (2019) 1484e1505 An unprecedented surge in antibiotic consumption and the frequent adoption of last resort antibiotics used to cure multi-drug resistant bacterial infections have raised serious concerns for human health as there are chances to evolve resistant strains in natural environments (Van Boeckel et al., 2014). The spillage of antibiotics in natural environments through various sources is continuously increasing, as evidenced by their detection from several rivers across the globe (Tables 1e3). A large number of antibiotics from various classes have been reported to be found ubiquitously such as b-lactams (e.g. penicillin), aminoglycosides (e.g. streptomycin, kanamycin, neomycin), chloramphenicol (e.g. chloramphenicol), glycopeptides (e.g. vancomycin), sulfonamides (e.g. sulfamethoxazole, sulfathiazole, sulfamethazine), tetracyclines (e.g. tetracycline, oxytetracycline, doxycycline), macrolides (e.g. erythromycin, azithromycin), and quinolones (e.g. ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin). Moreover, some of them have been found at significantly high concentrations across the globe such as sulfamethoxazole (SMX), ciprofloxacin (CIP), ofloxacin (OFL), norfloxacin (NOR), tetracycline (TET), and trimethoprim (TMP) to reflect high usage of these antibiotics as human and veterinary medicine. Apart from this, other antibiotics that are frequently reported with considerably high concentrations include oxytetracycline (OXY), erythromycin (ERY), enrofloxacin (ENRO), sulfamethazine (SULMZN), roxithromycin (ROX), and sulfathiazole (SULTZL) (Fig. 1aee). Mechanistically, if bacteria are exposed to high/lethal concentrations, they are more likely to evolve resistant determinants as a counter response mechanism for survival. This seems to be an obvious reason for the presence of ARB and ARGs in nearly all investigated rivers across the globe. Isakavagu-Nakkavagu streams connected to Godawari River (India), and Wangyang River and Hai River system (China) represented the highest antibiotic load. Isakavagu-Nakkavagu streams were reported with the highest concentrations of CIP while TET was the most abundant in both of the Chinese rivers (Table 1). In African continent, SMX was reported with considerably high concentration in all investigated rivers. Although antibiotic load in any of the European and Australian rivers were lower than that of other continents, the CIP and SMX were reported to be the highest across the European rivers. In American continent, Poudre River was marked as the most contaminated with the maximum concentration of OXY, followed by TET and SULTZL (Tables 1 and 2). 4.1. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in Asian rivers The irrational use of antibiotics is most common in Asian countries, which eventually leads to dissemination of antibiotic residues and subsequently, ARB and ARGs (Chandy, 2008; Lundborg and Tamhankar, 2017). The highest concentration of antibiotics in Asia was reported in the Isakavagu-Nakkavagu streams of India, which eventually leads to the Godawari River. The reported concentration of ciprofloxacin was highest with a value of 2.5  106 ng/ Lfollowed by ofloxacin (1  104 ng/L), norfloxacin (4.7  103 ng/L), and trimethoprim (4  103 ng/L) (Table 1). The study suggested that the area in vicinity of pharmaceutical production plants is highly prone to antibiotic contamination, especially when waste water treatment is technologically inefficient (Fick et al., 2009). It is worth adding that concentration levels of various antibiotic residues in WWTP are eventually reflected in adjacent aquatic reservoirs. In Hong Kong, WWTPs were observed with substantially high concentration of ofloxacin (up to 7.9  103 ng/L) with significant correlations (Deng et al., 2016; Leung et al., 2012). Similarly, antibiotic contamination of surface and groundwater was also found to be high enough (up to 10 mg/L for fluoroquinolones) in the area adjacent to WWTPs of pharmaceutical plant (Fick et al., 2009). It is worth addressing that due to fairly good stability, fluoroquinolones can penetrate the floor of rivers and lakes to mix with groundwater (Pico and Andreu, 2007 ). Seasonality also affects the rate of antibiotic leaching and mixing to the ground water. Antibiotic residues degrade faster in sunlight and thereby a reduction in groundwater antibiotic contamination may be observed in summer as compared to winter. Overall, a wide range of ARGs has been reported in Indian rivers, while b-lactam resistance genes are the most prevalent (Table 4). Most popular and crucial antibiotics were also frequently reported in the Chinese river system (Tables 1 and 2). Hai and Wangyang Rivers were observed to be the most contaminated with very high concentrations of SMX, OFL, TET, and TMP (Fig. 1a). Although 100 ng/L concentration of antibiotics is enough to select antibiotic resistance, rivers with considerably higher values (>1000 ng/L) of antibiotics need immediate attention. Looking at the current data, SMX concentration was considerably higher in Wangyang River (4.8  103 ), Hai River (4.8  103 ), and Ravi River (2.7  103 ) (Table 1). Although CIP concentration was the highest in Isakka-Nakkavagu stream due to spillage from nearby pharmaceutical plant, none of the other Asian rivers was observed with CIP concentrations higher than 552 ng/L (Table 1). High values of OFL were reported in Isakavagu-Nakkavagu stream (1  104 ng/L), Hai River system (1.17  104 ng/L), Wangyang River (1  104 ng/L), and Pearl River (1.56  103 ng/L) (Table 1). Further, the values of NOR were observed as 4.7  103 , 6.8  103 , and 1.1  103 ng/L in Isakavagu-Nakkavagu stream, Hai River system, and Pearl River, respectively (Table 1). In case of TET, the significantly high values were seen in Hai River (2.5  104 ng/L), Wangyang River (2.5  104 ng/L), and Nanming River (6.8  103 ng/L) (Table 1). Further, TMP concentrations above the 1000 ng/L were reported in Isakavagu-Nakkavagu, Ravi River, Hai River, and Wangyang River with the values of 4  103 , 1.7  103 , 1.1  103 , and 1.1  103 ng/L, respectively (Table 1). Majority of the Chinese rivers contained sulfonamide and tetracycline resistance genes (Jiang et al., 2013; Tao et al., 2010). The data on sulfonamide resistance genes indicated the dominance of sul1 and sul2 while tetA and tetB were the major resistance gene subtypes in the tetracycline cohort. For example, in the Pearl River system (Liuxi River, Zhujiang River, and Shijing River) of China, tetA and tetB resistance genes were reported with 43% and 40% detection frequencies, respectively (Tao et al., 2010). Apart from this, ARGs were also detected against belactam, quinolone, chloramphenicol, aminoglycoside, and the macrolide class of antibiotics (Dang et al., 2017). Consistent positive correlations between the concentrations of antibiotics and corresponding ARGs suggest that the fate of ARGs to a certain extent is related to the presence of particular antibiotics in the environment (Larsson, 2014; Martínez, 2008). It was suggested that the absolute abundance of ARGs in the urban rivers of China ranged up to 5.9  106 copies/ml while being found up to 2  108 copies/g in the river sediments (Xu et al., 2016). Xu et al. (2018) demonstrated a positive correlation between the total concentration of major antibiotics and corresponding ARGs (sul1, 2, and 3 for sulfonamides and tetA, and tetB for tetracyclines) in Xiangjiang River. Interestingly, the abundance of quinolone resistance genes was also detected despite fairly low concentrations of quinolone antibiotics (60.8 ng/L in water and 8.2 ng/g in sediment). Further, antibiotic resistance is dynamic and ever expanding so that bacterial resistome from non-clinical environment may migrate to clinical settings through various environmental compartments. For instance, 100 multi-drug resistant enterococcal isolates were recovered from a hospital in China with a dominance of tetracycline, b-lactam, macrolide, and glycoside resistance genes (Jia et al., 2014). Considering urbanization as a factor for antibiotic resistance dissemination, suburban areas have been reported with elevated levels of ARG contamination compared to urban sites, which is most likely due to improper sanitation strategies (Jiang et al., 2013). On the other hand, incidences of high resistance at urban sites may presumably reflect the influence of industrialization, urbanization, and extensive anthropogenic activities (Proia et al., 2018). Additionally, fecal contamination of surface water is considered as a major mode of antibiotic resistance dissemination in developing countries as evidenced by E. coli analysis (Chen et al., 2011). For instance, multiple antibiotic resistant E. coli isolates were reported from the Dongjiang River catchment with the highest frequencies of sul2 resistance gene (Su et al., 2012). In another study in the Taihu Lake Basin, China, a high abundance of antibiotic resistant E. coli isolates of various origin (e.g., chicken, swine, and human) with high frequency (57%) of class I integron were reported in surface water samples (Zhang et al., 2015a). The persistence of extracellular DNA in river sediments also facilitates the dissemination of ARGs (Mao et al., 2013). Interestingly, it was reported that the concentrations of sul1 and sul2 in river sediment samples were higher (120e2000 times) than those in the surface water. This observation confirmed the role of sediments as a major reservoir of ARGs (Luo et al., 2010). Lakes in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River were also reported to have considerably high loads of sul, tet, and qnr resistant genes, which were positively correlated with high proportions of antibiotics, heavy metals, and built-up land (Yang et al., 2017b, 2017c). Furthermore, colistin resistance gene mcr-1 was reported at different locations of the Haihe River (Yang et al., 2017a), which is a major risk factor for causing untreatable infections in human (Malhotra-Kumar et al., 2016). Apart from this, the presence of ARGs has also been reported in drinking water from the Yangtze and Pearl River delta (Guo et al., 2014). Considering several investigations, it is very clear that rivers in the vicinity of developing urban sites with extensive anthropogenic activities are highly prone to the acquisition and spread of ARB and ARGs (Dang et al., 2017; Deng et al., 2016; Ouyang et al., 2015; Su et al., 2014). In contrast to the frequently reported positive correlations between the concentrations of antibiotics and the levels of corresponding ARGs, the level of ARGs has also been found to be relatively independent of antibiotic concentration (Hsu et al., 2014). At few instances, a high concentration of toxic heavy metals in the aquatic microenvironment was attributed to such a contrasting trend (Baker-Austin et al., 2006; Jia et al., 2018). A growing body of evidence suggests that the flow of heavy metal residues as a result of industrial pollution and anthropogenic activities in river catchments also contributes to the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance. Briefly, a substantial number of studies strongly suggest the impact of urbanization, poor wastewater management, and high anthropogenic activities on ARB and ARG contamination in rivers (Tripathi and Cytryn, 2017). Water quality is another important driving force for propagation and maintenance of antibiotic resistance genes. High concentration of nutrients in aquatic systems attracts ARG abundance. For example, absolute abundance of ARGs was found generally higher in the catchment area of Tiaoxi River, China while being positively correlated with the NH3eN, TN, and TP (Zheng et al., 2017). Further, high usage of antibiotics in animal and poultry farms leads to abundant antibiotic residues, ARB and ARGs in manure, and use of this manure in agricultural systems pose a risk of introducing ARGs in agricultural soils. Similarly direct land application of sewage sludge may also introduce ARGs to agricultural systems (Xie et al., 2016). 4.2. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in African rivers Antibiotic resistance is increasing rapidly because of easy access to antibiotics in developing countries. Further, residues of antibiotics find their route to natural environment through urine, fecal waste, and waste water effluents. The number of investigations related to pharmaceutical and biological contamination in the aquatic environments of African continent is limited. However, currently available data indicate the widespread presence of such contaminants in various environmental compartments of Africa as well. The deterioration of water quality and the emergence of ARB and ARGs in African Rivers is attributed to heavy release of urban wastewater effluents in African rivers (Sibanda et al., 2015). Sulfamethoxazole, ciprofloxacin, trimethoprim, and erythromycin have been reported in high concentrations in all the investigated African rivers (Fig. 1b). The concentration of sulfamethoxazole was found to be as high as 1.37  104 ng/L in the Nairobi River basin and 2.86  103 and 2.56  103 ng/L in the Ghana and Durban Rivers, respectively (Table 1). Further, apart from SMX, only CIP and TMP were reported above 1000 ng/L with values of 1.16  103 ng/L (in Ghana rivers) and 2.65  103 ng/L (in Nairobi river basin), respectively (Table 1). Hospital effluents are also the major source which contribute much to the dissemination of metals, ARB, and ARGs in sub-Saharan African Rivers (Laffite et al., 2016). Oued El-Harrach and Oued BeniMessous rivers of Algeria were reported with considerably high concentration of heavy metals (e.g., cadmium, copper, and lead) along with prevalence of heavy metal and antibiotic resistance genes (Djouadi et al., 2017). Pathogenic MDR vibrio cholerae O1 was detected in various water samples in the New Bell area of Douala, Cameron. Most importantly, these strains were detected from wells and streams which are used for daily purposes in that area indicating that a serious stance on potable water supply management must be taken (Akoachere et al., 2013). Likewise, abundance of ESBL-positive Enterobacteriaceae was reported in environmental and drinking water samples near Kinshasa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Enterobacter cloacae and Klebsiella pneumoniae were the major ARB with high resistance towards aminoglycoside and fluoroquinolone classes of antibiotics (De Boeck et al., 2012a, 2012b). Nigeria also witnessed the contamination of ESBL positive bacteria and associated genes (blaSHV, blaCTX-M-15 and blaTEM) in environmental and drinking water sources (Adelowo et al., 2018). Plesiomonas shigelloides, an enteric pathogen was reported in Nigerian Rivers (Asejire River, Dandaru River, Ona River, and Erinle River). Isolates of Plesiomonas shigelloides displayed high resistance against SMX (100%) and ERY (93%). The major antimicrobial resistant determinants included (1) sulfonamides: sul1 (18%), sul2 (20%), and dfr1 (70%), (2) tetracyclines: tetA (78%) and tetE (57%), (3) b-lactams: ampC (37%), and (4) aminoglycosides: aphA2 (36%) and strA (67%) (Adesiyan et al., 2019). In another investigation, antibiotic resistant E. coli was isolated from river water sources in Osun State, South Western Nigeria. The most frequent resistance was reported against tetracyclines, sulfonamides, and b-lactam classes of antibiotics with the highest prevalence of tetD (78%), sul2 (41%), and ampC (22%) genes, respectively (Titilawo et al., 2015). Such incidences of resistance towards common antibiotics in Nigeria region have been found to be associated with high level of Staphylococcus aureus borne bacterial infections, e.g., Buruli ulcer lesions (Anyim et al., 2016). It is worth noting that multi-drug resistant E. coli strains were most frequently reported in African rivers. Clinically important multi-drug resistant bacteria were also recovered from urban rivers of Adis Ababa. Dominant bacterial community included E. coli (26%), K. pneumoniae (20%), and K. oxytoca (19%) with the highest resistance against ampicillin. It is noticeable that such frequent incidences of high resistance in African continent are due to high antimicrobial usage and poor waste management practices (Belachew et al., 2018). River sediments also act as reservoir for ARB and provide them a suitable place to persist and survive for longer duration (Kümmerer, 2009). The high prevalence of multi-drug resistant E. coli was seen in riverbed sediments of Apies River, South Africa. About 98% of the E.coli isolates were observed with resistance to at least one antibiotic while over 80% was multi-resistant, more frequently against ampicillin (87.2%) and augmentin (82.1%). Multi-drug resistance is a growing problem worldwide to find highly resistant bacteria towards advanced generation antibiotics such as b-lactam (Mocktar et al., 2009; Zeba, 2005). Since the spectrum of pathogenic bacteria is very wide, the presence of several other ARB in sediments is very obvious (Abia et al., 2015). In the Durban area of South Africa, aquatic systems were reported to contain an abundance of Listeria and Aeromonas spp. which showed multi-resistance to common antibiotics such as penicillin, erythromycin, cephalosporin, and nalidixic acid. Furthermore, the resistance of Listeria spp. towards b-lactam class of antibiotics was too high so that the highest resistance was reported against penicillin (100%) followed by ampicillin (83.33%) and cephalothin (60.26%). This data on resistance is alarming in this area where a high number of immunocompromised patients are under antibiotic treatment regime due to TB and HIV pandemic (Olaniran et al., 2015). Furthermore, river and estuarine water in the same region were also found to be extremely contaminated with sulfonamide (sul1, sul2, and sul3) and tetracycline (tetM) resistant genes. Interestingly, no correlation was observed between antibiotic concentration and ARGs, suggesting the ARG dissemination in a wider area independent of selection pressure (Suzuki et al., 2015). In the Eastern Cape province of Africa, a large number of antibiotics and associated ARB (e.g., penicillin, oxacillin, vancomycin, clindamycin, and cephalothin resistant Aeromonas isolates) were reported in Kat and Tyume Rivers (Igbinosa et al., 2013). WWTPs are found to act as major point source of microbial pollution in Africa. The release of inadequately treated wastewater is one of the prime sources of ARB in the natural environment. Umgeni and Aller Rivers of South Africa witnessed the abundance of antibiotic resistant and virulent Salmonella spp. at downstream of WWTP. The presence of virulence gene in bacteria is indicative of their pathogenic capabilities in susceptible host (Odjadjare and Olaniran, 2015a). Appropriate guidelines must be followed by the regulatory bodies in order to prevent pollution in riverine system due to the discharge of poorly treated effluents. 4.3. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in European rivers Antibiotic contamination has been detected in various environmental matrices across the globe (Aus der Beek et al., 2016). Several lines of evidence suggest wastewater effluents as a dominant emission route for release of antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs to the environment. A recent investigation revealed the influence of urban wastewater effluent in increasing the concentration of ARGs and integrons in northern European rivers (Berglund et al., 2015). In line with several previous reports in global rivers, the number as well as concentration of antibiotics and ARGs were observed to be significantly higher at downstream of wastewater discharge point as compared to upstream. As such, it suggests the major role of WWTPs in dissemination of resistance determinants (Berglund et al., 2015). Substantially high concentrations of CIP, SMX, TMP, and ERY were reported throughout European rivers (Johnson et al., 2015).The Reda River and Charmoise River have been reported to have extremely high concentrations of CIP (2.74  103 ng/L) and SMX (1.43  103 ng/L) (Table 1, Fig. 1c). Apart from this, German rivers have also been diagnosed with high concentrations of erythromycin (1.7  103 ng/L) (Table 2). Furthermore, concentration of other antibiotics in most of the European rivers ranged below 500 ng/L which seems considerably low as compared to Asian and African rivers. It is worth addressing that even a very low concentration of antibiotics may provide a favorable environment for emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance. In a study conducted in the UK, ampicillin resistance was reported as the most prevalent phenotype and ARGs were found to be higher in downstream sediment samples (Amos et al., 2014b). The presence of high levels of antibiotics and respective ARGs downstream to effluent receiving point is a usual phenomenon; however, high level of antibiotics in upstream samples indicates the possibility of other sources of antibiotic inputs such as high anthropogenic activities in catchment, run off from contaminated agricultural fields, or large scale animal farms (Jechalke et al., 2014). Clinically important fluoroquinolone resistant E. coli of the O25b:H4-ST131 lineage was reported from the Thames River, London. Furthermore, the impact of tidal volume is important in mixing of bacterial contaminants as confirmed by the presence of ciprofloxacin and cefpodoxime resistant E. coli only in the samples collected during the high tide (Dhanji et al., 2010). E. coli isolates from rivers and lakes of Switzerland showed resistance against blactam and quinolone classes of antibiotics (Zurfluh et al., 2014). It is worth adding that coliform load increases in rivers because of fecal pollution through different environmental routes. Surface water samples from the Rhine River, Germany have also been reported to contain multi-resistant and pathogenic E. coli strains (Stange et al., 2016). Since the Rhine River is the longest river and acts as a raw source of drinking water, better management strategies are required to restrict contamination loads (Stange et al., 2016). Recent reports also confirmed the frequent presence of ESBLpositive Enterobacteriaceae in Austrian rivers as evidenced by the dominance of blaCTX-M (a gene family of ESBL) harboring E. coli in the Mur River, Austria (Zarfel et al., 2017). Kizilirmak River of Turkey was observed with vancomycin and teicoplanin resistant bacterial isolates (Nakipoglu et al., 2017 ) while Ter River of Spain with abundant ciprofloxacin resistant strains with associated quinolone resistance genes (e.g., qnrA, qnrB, qnrS, and aac(6’)-Ib-cr genes) (Marti et al., 2014). High sorption ability of quinolones to soil and sediments delayed their biodegradation and accumulation. The persistence of antibiotics then exerted a high selection pressure and in turn the abundance of quinolone resistance genes in environmental reservoirs (Martínez, 2008). In Europe, Aeromonas spp. is extensively disseminated as an important reservoir of ARGs in the natural environment even in drinking water samples (Koksal et al., 2007). Hospitals and urban wastewaters are continuously adding ARB and ARGs to rivers to increase the existing resistome of the environment which may pose a serious risk to human and animal health (Rodriguez-Mozaz et al., 2015). Although there are several biological factors associated with the increment of ARGs in any aquatic system, climatic factors such as moderate rainfall may also increase the abundance of ARGs, as evidenced by the up to 24-fold ARG increase in the Toce River, Italy (Di Cesare et al., 2017). Such an ARG increment in river during rainfall is linked with catchmentderived nutrients and ARGs in response to intense anthropogenic activities in the catchment area (Di Cesare et al., 2017). At a few instances seasonality has also been found to affect the abundance and prevalence of ARGs. In a recent study, a higher prevalence of bacterial ARGs was seen in Llobregat River water during winter while opposite was the case with sediment. Although there was no clear trend in ARGs of phage fraction, a clear increase in the prevalence and abundance was reported during summer and autumn (Calero-C aceres et al., 2017). It is worth adding that the transmission of ARGs is not only limited to bacterial community but involves a dominant participation and interplay of mobile genetic elements such as bacteriophage and plasmids of the aquatic environments (Lekunberri et al., 2017). In fact, the role of MGEs is equally important in dissemination of ARGs in the natural environment. 4.4. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in north and South American rivers ARB and ARGs in freshwaters are emerging contaminants as serious human health concern. Although data on antibiotic and associated ARB and ARG contamination are scarce for the American continent, almost all investigated rivers were observed to have low but diverse range of these contaminants. It is noticeable that only the Poudre River in US had exceptionally high concentrations of oxytetracycline (5.61  104 ng/L), tetracycline (1.02  105 ng/L), sulfathiazole (4.7  103 ng/L) and, sulfamethazine (1.70  103 ng/L) (Table 1, Fig. 1d). In contrast, all other American rivers were observed with low concentration (to have at least one ARG containing plasmid while ampicillin resistance was the most common particularly in that river. b-lactamase production by ARB was suggested as major mechanism for high ampicillin resistance. Furthermore, resistance to the third generation antibiotics cefotaxime and ceftazidime clearly indicated the presence of ESBL-positive microbes. The most frequently detected genera of ARB belonged to Acinetobacter, Alcaligenes, Citrobacter, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, and Serratia (Ash et al., 2002). About 1700 deaths and over 26,000 health-associated infections were reported to be associated with ESBL-positive Enterobacteriaceae alone in the US (Control and Prevention, 2014). A novel fosfomycin resistance gene, fosA2, was also isolated from a fosfomycin resistant strain of Enterobacter cloacae which showed higher resistance than its previous fosfomycinA counterpart (Xu et al., 2011). Another study in southwestern British Columbia indicated the role of anthropogenized urban and agricultural watersheds on the integron mediated emergence and spread of ARGs (UyaguariDíaz et al., 2018). Similarly various locations of Colorado, USA (e.g., Poudre River and South Platte River) witnessed the occurrence and abundance of ARGs as a result of heavily anthropogenized urban and agricultural sites (Pruden et al., 2006). Impact of extreme rainfall and heavy flooding events may change the riverine resistome. For example, heavy flood incidences in Colorado front range impacted the watershed of Cache La Poudre River and transferred the abundant ARGs to a pristine site with a rapid quantitative recovery at impacted sites within an year (Garner et al., 2016). In the Altamaha River estuary of Georgia, USA, tetracycline resistance gene and integron profiles varied temporally and spatially, with a higher ARG frequency at sites most proximal to the watershed (Barkovskii et al., 2010). In contrast, in an area adjacent to the watershed of the South Nation River drainage basin, Ontario, Canada, a minimal level of antibiotic resistance and virulence was detected in Enterococci spp. It is noticeable that isolated enterococci were of various origins such as humans, avian, domestic, and wildlife animals (Lanthier et al., 2011). Seasonal variation in macrolide resistant gene concentrations was reported at the South Fork, Iowa watershed which were most likely due to swine manure application in those area during mid-spring and late fall (Rieke et al., 2018). Unregulated pollution from nearby pharmaceutical industries also contributed to the elevated level of ARGs as observed in Almendares River, Cuba (Graham et al., 2010). Moreover, as farm animals were frequently exposed to antibiotics, their fecal matter facilitated run-off mediated entry of antibiotic (ARBs and ARGs) to riverine system (Barkovskii et al., 2010). It is worth addressing that agricultural and municipal run-offs add organic and inorganic matter to rivers to facilitate the emergence and dissemination of ARB and ARGs. 4.5. Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance in Australian rivers The prevalence of antibiotic concentration in environmental matrices and associated proliferation of ARB and ARGs are also of clinical importance. Much higher levels of SMX (2  103 ng/L) and CIP (1.3  103 ng/L) have been detected in Australian rivers while all other investigated antibiotics ranged below 350 ng/L (Watkinson et al., 2009) (Tables 1 and 2, Fig. 1e). In Brisbane River system, the highest incidence of bacterial resistance was recorded for tetracycline (51%) followed by cephalothin (41%), and sulfafurazole (24%) (Watkinson et al., 2007). Surprisingly, the incidence of antibiotic resistance was significantly high in river surface water as compared to nearby WWTP. Such contrasting results have been reported by other investigators as well. The most likely reason was high selection pressure during the wastewater treatment. Treatment selects more resistant microbes and eventually a greater resistance is received by river through final effluent (Makowska et al., 2016; Reinthaler et al., 2003). WWTP effluents were identified as major source of antibiotic contamination to the surface water systems which were also confirmed by detection of a huge number of antibiotics within watersheds of South-East Queensland, Australia. Although the investigated WWTPs in this area were found highly efficient with an average removal of more than 80% for all investigated antibiotics, antibiotics were still detected in ng/L range with macrolide, quinolones, and sulfonamides as most prevalent antibiotics (Watkinson et al., 2009). Clinically relevant ARGs were investigated in the Brisbane River system (Stoll et al., 2012). Accordingly, the most frequently detected ARGs were sul1&2, dfrA1, and catII of which codes for resistance corresponded to sulfonamide, trimethoprim, and chloramphenicol, respectively. The most likely reason for this resistance was widespread use of the corresponding antibiotics in both humans and animals. Similar to other Australian surface water system, albeit at low prevalence, methicillin and sulfonamide resistance genes were also observed in the Werribee River Basin (Barker-Reid et al., 2010). The pattern of resistance in the aquatic system explained the trend of usage of various classes of antibiotics in that region and/or country that may also help issue guidelines for proper usage of specific antibiotic classes.
The era of modern antibiotics started with the discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming. Since then, several antibiotics have been introduced to save millions of life (Davies and Davies, 2010; Ventola, 2015). Unfortunately, antibiotic resistance also emerged over time in response to the unintentional spillage of antibiotics in the environment. Currently, the occurrence and dissemination of ARB and ARGs in rivers is a serious problem worldwide. Selective pressure of antibiotic load favors and escalates acquisition/introduction of ARGs from pre-existing ARB via horizontal gene transfer (Allen et al., 2010; Holmes et al., 2016). The growing body of evidence suggests that both overuse of antibiotics and inadequate wastewater treatment methods are contributing to the emergence and dissemination of antibiotic resistance (Davies and Davies, 2010; Shallcross and Davies, 2014). Considering the line of evidence collected so far, in almost every monitored river, there is a diverse range of antibiotic, ARB, and ARG contamination. However, the severity of contamination varies across the rivers (Berglund et al., 2015; Jia et al., 2018; Laffite et al., 2016). Close interconnections of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems act as shuttles that distribute, exchange, and disseminate the ARB and ARGs among various environmental compartments. Over the last few years, several studies have been conducted worldwide on the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance. Nonetheless, most of these studies focused on Asian and European countries (Table 4). The major reason for the ubiquitous presence of ARB and ARGs stems from the high and inadequate use of antibiotics, release of contaminated effluents from clinical, industrial, aquaculture, animal farm, and agricultural settings to the river, and fecal contamination of surface waters (Laxminarayan and Chaudhury, 2016) (Fig. 2). Furthermore, heavy metal contamination due to rapid urbanization and anthropogenic pressure also contributes to the coselection of ARGs among diverse bacterial spp. of aquatic milieu (Di Cesare et al., 2016; Seiler and Berendonk, 2012). Antibiotic resistance in bacteria is introduced through various modes such as alteration of an antibiotic target via mutation in the pre-existing gene, alteration in finely regulated efflux pumps, and horizontal gene transfer from donor bacterial species against the selective pressure of antibiotics and/or heavy metals (Munita and Arias, 2016). Horizontal gene transfer is thought to play a major role in the dissemination of ARGs which involves transformation, transduction, and conjugation mechanisms. Out of these mechanisms, conjugation is considered to be the most important mode of resistance gene transfer (von Wintersdorff et al., 2016) (Fig. 3). It is worth noting that most anti-microbial antibiotics are naturally present and co-resident bacteria have evolved the intrinsic resistance mechanism to nullify their action in order to survive. The major problem is not the intrinsic resistance but their capability of transferring the resistance to other pathogenic and/or non-pathogenic bacterial species present in response to stressors (e.g., antibiotics and heavy metals) present in aquatic environments (Seiler and Berendonk, 2012). Rivers act as a major reservoir of a diverse bacterial population, which increases the likelihood of the co-existence and interaction of bacteria from clinical, industrial, animal husbandry, agricultural, and urban compartments. Such coexistence of diverse bacterial species increases the chances of exchange and acquisition of ARGs, which may have serious clinical impacts due to acquired resistance in pathogenic bacteria(Normark and Normark, 2002). Exhaustive studies have been conducted in the last decade to establish the role of integrons and mobile genetic elements such as plasmids, transposons and integrons in the transfer and proliferation of antibiotic resistance (Frost et al., 2005; Partridge et al., 2018). Considering bacterial resistance, integrons are the most important gene acquisition system that allows bacteria to adapt and evolve rapidly through expression of new genes (e.g. resistance genes). In fact, these genetic elements facilitate the transfer of resistance genes from one DNA molecule to another and from one bacterium to another (Partridge et al., 2018). During analysis of integrons in global rivers, Integron 1 was the most frequently reported and attributed to the phenomenon of antibiotic resistance transfer. Integron 2 was less frequent than that of integron 1 while Integron 3 was rarely reported. Plasmids were also reported at several occasions but its dominance was seen in European continent, especially in Ter River of Spain (Table 4). Usually, the abundance of integrons in any aquatic ecosystem is correlated with the degree of antibiotics and heavy metal contamination. Furthermore, the presence of gene aggregation platforms on integrons are attributed to their multidrug resistance capacity (Cambray et al., 2010). Integrons, especially class I integrons has been reported very frequently and positively correlated with the degree of ARB and ARGs in the river (Chen et al., 2015; Gillings et al., 2008; Lupo et al., 2012). For example, high incidences (40%) of class I integrons containing multi-resistant bacteria were detected in the Torsa River, India. Moreover, a higher multi-resistant bacteria index was positively correlated with integron carriage, thus proving the significant association between multi-resistance and integrons (Mukherjee and Chakraborty, 2006). Integrons carry determinants for recombination and expression, and integrate mobile ARG cassettes (Hall and Collis, ). Integrons facilitate the proliferation of antibiotic resistance through horizontal gene transfer from clinically resistant bacteria to environmental bacteria thus increasing the chances of dissemination of clinically resistant bacterial spp. (Chang et al., 2000; Jones et al., 1997; Martínez, 2008). There are several other things that could influence and facilitate ARG transfer. For instance, the collection and concentration of bacteria by filter-feeding organisms promote gene exchange within the internal microenvironment. Apart from this, biofilms in aquatic habitats also create a favorable setting for plasmid exchange (Lupo et al., 2012; Molin and TolkerNielsen, 2003). For example, the presence of ARGs such as ermB and sulI genes in biofilms was observed far downstream of the wastewater discharge point (up to 1 km) (Proia et al., 2016). In the current scenario, rivers are a widespread natural reservoir for ARB and ARGs, as evidenced by data obtained from global rivers (Table 4). Monitoring and management of aquatic reservoirs are more important in areas where flood incidences are very common. A flood may distribute pathogenic ARGs to pristine sites (Garner et al., 2016). For example, outbreaks of drug resistant Vibrio cholera were reported after a flood in the Brahmaputra River valley, Assam, India (Bhuyan et al., 2016). Several other studies have helped to gain a better understanding of factors that influence ARG concentrations in the river ecosystem (Levy, 2002). Seasonality is a critical factor influencing local ARG levels, as evidenced by higher ARG transport down the Almendares River, Cuba in the wet season as compared to the dry season (Levy, 2002). This increase of ARGs was most possibly due to higher flow and re-entrainment of ARGs from the sediments during the wet season (Knapp et al., 2012). In addition to river water, sediments are also a potential reservoir of ARGs where they can persist for a longer time, as observed in the in both bacterial and phage fractions of Mediterranean River sediment (Calero-Caceres et al., 2017 ). The occurrence and dominance of ARGs are also influenced by seasonal variations. Considering river water, higher prevalence of bacterial ARGs was observed in the winter while sediment showed the opposite trend. Further, although the phages did not display a fixed pattern, a distinguishable increase in phage-harbored ARGs was observed in summer and autumn (Calero-C aceres et al., 2017). Phages and plasmids favor dissemination of ARGs in the aquatic environment, especially close to or downstream of waste water effluent discharge points (Colomer-Lluch et al., 2014; Lekunberri et al., 2017). Furthermore, riverine biofilms were reported to have ARGs even far downstream of the effluent discharge point. An extensive investigation suggested streambed biofilms as an ideal setting for the acquisition and dissemination of ARGs (Proia et al., 2016). WWTP effluents also affect the physico-chemistry and aquatic ecology of the receiving river (Martinez et al., 2008; Osuolale and Okoh, 2015). Usually, the source of pollution directly represents the nature of resistance genes in the receiving river. However, the complex interplay of genes in riverine system alter the overall resistome (Xu et al., 2016). Besides antibiotics, selective pressure of heavy metals has been positively correlated with abundance of ARGs, which actually indicates the co-selection of heavy metal and antibiotic resistance genes in bacterial population (Xu et al., 2017). For example, abundance of CTX-M genes is reported as a good indicators of multi-resistance in aquatic ecosystems (Tac~ ao et al., 2012). 
Antibiotics are usually introduced into the natural environment through effluents from various sources. Insufficiently treated wastes from industrial, clinical, pharmaceutical, and animal farm settings have been observed with elevated levels of antibiotics in their wastewater ranging from ng/L to mg/L. The continuous flow of antibiotics in aquatic environment for a considerably long time resulted in the abundance of multi-resistant bacterial species (Kolar et al., 2001; Rodriguez-Mozaz et al., 2015). According to a WHO report, clinical antibiotic resistance is growing at an alarming rate, which is highly concerning with regard to human health in the context of treating antibiotic resistant infections particularly of multidrug-resistant nature (Lawe-Davies and Bennett, 2017). As mentioned in previous sections, high concentrations of ARB and ARGs in clinical, industrial, and agricultural wastewaters are threatening to ecosystems (Karkman et al., 2018). Substantially high amounts of antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs from clinical, agricultural, and industrial settings will eventually exert dominant controls on WWTPs, solid waste leachates, landfills, the soil of animal farms, and surface waters (Hultman et al., 2018; Nagarajan et al., 2012). Under the influence of these dominant sources, antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs will find their way to natural aquatic ecosystems such as rivers and lakes (Berglund et al., 2015; Laffite et al., 2016; Sabri et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2018). Several treatment methods are utilized in WWTPs for the removal of chemical and biological contaminants (Barancheshme and Munir, 2018) (Table 5). Both aerobic/anaerobic treatment strategies are used to remove ARB and ARGs. However, pilot studies suggest that anaerobic treatment is a better strategy than aerobic methods, as evidenced by lower concentrations of ARGs in final effluent after anaerobic treatment (Christgen et al., 2015). It is worth adding that anaerobic-aerobic sequence bioreactors in combination led to the most efficient removal of ARGs (85% of influent ARGs) as compared to aerobic (83%) and anaerobic (62%) bioreactor units in isolation (Christgen et al., 2015). In addition, membrane-based technologies are recommended to couple with sequence reactors for better removal efficiencies. Considering the recent advancements in treatment strategies for wastewater, constructed wetlands have been applied for the removal of pharmaceutical and biological contaminants (Table 5). Constructed wetlands are small man-made wetlands that provide effective wastewater treatment. The design and features of such wetlands ensure the maximum removal of antibiotics and ARGs (Chen et al., 2016a). Interestingly, seasonality also affects the removal of ARGs in integrated surface flow constructed wetlands, as evidenced by ARG removal rates of 59.5% and 77.8% demonstrated in summer and winter, respectively (Fang et al., 2017). Additionally, positive correlations between class 1 integrons and ARGs were also observed in constructed wetlands (Fang et al., 2017). Chen et al. (2016a,b) analyzed different mesocosm scale constructed wetlands for the removal of antibiotics and ARGs from raw domestic wastewater. Subsurface flow CWs showed higher removal potentials than surface flow CWs. Furthermore, the use of plants in these CWs was found to be more effective in the removal of biological contaminants (Chen et al., 2016b). Likewise, it was demonstrated that zeolite is a highly efficient substrate for antibiotic removal in CWs. Briefly, CWs showed potential implications in the removal of antibiotics and ARGs from wastewaters (Chen et al., 2016a). Disinfection methods have also been found to be effective in killing pathogenic microorganisms (Table 5). Chlorination is a frequently used disinfection process employed in wastewater treatment which has been found capable of inactivating ARB and ARGs (Yuan et al., 2015; Zhuang et al., 2015). However, studies also suggest that a proportion of ARB could survive the disinfection process and may then disseminate to the natural environment through different environmental compartments (Su et al., 2014). Furthermore, water disinfection using Cl(O)2 may be an effective approach for the removal of b-lactam antibiotics such as penicillin G (Li et al., 2010). Additionally, UV irradiation, ozone oxidation processes, and photocatalytic methods are also used as disinfection strategies (Keen and Linden, 2013; Sharma et al., 2016). Although chlorination and UV irradiation are both effective in the removal of antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs, a sequential UV/chlorination method has been reported with a maximum removal efficiency (Sharma et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2015b). In another approach, H2O2 and/ or TiO2 thin films showed the ability to remove ARB and both extracellular and intracellular ARGs (Guo et al., 2017a). Coagulation technology is also used for the removal of chemical and biological contamination, especially from WWTP effluents (Table 5). Notably, improved water quality of WWTP effluents may significantly contribute to mitigating the environmental contamination load (Li et al., 2017a, 2017b). Zirconium has been reported as a better coagulant in improving water quality (as compared to Fe and Al), which acted efficiently in lowering the dissolved organic carbon content (Jarvis et al., 2012). The potential of the coagulation method was also demonstrated in removing tetracycline classes of antibiotics (Choi et al., 2006). Coagulation is also capable of removing phosphorous contamination from effluents, which may certainly help improve the health of receiving aquatic ecosystems by reducing eutrophication (Yang et al., 2010a). Aluminum sulfate and ferric chloride are also popularly used to remove organic pollutants from drinking water (Xiao et al., 2013). Interestingly, the antimicrobial potential of nanoparticles either in isolation or in combination with other agents has been described in a few studies to combat ARB and ARGs (Table 5). However, the role and application of nanoparticles is still controversial as they may also induce antibiotic resistance (Aruguete et al., 2013; Miller et al., 2013). In a few cases, nanoparticles may be toxic to flora, fauna, and human health (Srivastava et al., 2015). Technological advancements in wastewater treatment methods are progressing but certainly at a slower pace than needed at present. Highly efficient, rapid, and cost-effective technologies need to be introduced for the advancement of WWTPs. Furthermore, if contamination-free wastewater could be obtained, it may be reused for several purposes. In fact, advancements in treatment strategies may provide several advantages, most importantly in the context of environmental and human health. 7. Conclusion Contamination by antibiotics, ARB, and ARGs can easily be detected in rivers and other aquatic environments across the globe. The entry of antibiotics into the natural environment is a global challenge that requires various strategic approaches to manage associated risks. The results of our geographical survey on their distribution indicate that the levels of their pollution are controlled by various factors while there are some eminent patterns in each study region. Apart from this, the usage pattern of different classes of antibiotics in different countries can lead to the alteration of the trend on their resistance in aquatic environment. In developing countries, the implementation of efficient wastewater management systems is considerably slower than the access and consumption of modern antibiotics. WWTPs in various settings (e.g. clinical, industrial, aquaculture) are hotspots of ARB and ARGs and act as major reservoirs and suppliers of antibiotic resistance determinants to natural environments such as rivers. The major threat of antibiotic resistance in current scenario is: (1) Some human diseases (particularly bacterial infections) may be untreatable in near future, (2) Antibiotic resistance from animals (especially those reared for meat production) may be transferred to human through food chain, and (3) community composition of environmental micro-organism may change in response to an interplay of resistance gene transfer. Furthermore, antibiotic residues and ARGs in drinking water and food may produce serious side effects in children (Shao et al., 2018). Currently, antibiotic contamination-driven co-selection of resistance genes and their exchange or transfer to clinically relevant bacterial species is a major issue to combat. In addition to antibiotics, biocides, metals, and antimicrobial phytochemicals may drive the co-selection of antibiotic resistance. Although most WWTPs involve various treatment strategies before the final discharge of effluents, 100% removal of antibiotic residue and associated contaminants is not possible using the currently available methods. Hence, further treatment of sewage sludge is also needed. Nevertheless, the use of sludge to agricultural lands must be prohibited. Additionally, conventional WWTPs have not been designed to deal with pharmaceutical residues, which need to be replaced with advanced WWTPs to improve the final effluent quality. Briefly, unprecedented increases in the levels of ARB, ARGs, and MGEs warrant rapid technological advancement in removal and disinfection processes to control the spread of resistance. In clinical context, the major challenges in the 21st century should lie in increasing resistance against available antibiotics with the decreasing pace to discover new ones. Nonetheless, the emergence of resistance towards third generation antibiotics is alarming. Although the prevention of antibiotic resistance at the global scale is difficult to implement, a lesson can be learned from The Netherlands and Scandinavia, where reduced resistance levels have been achieved by using efficient management strategies. Antibiotics are indispensable for several clinical conditions, but policy makers can help play a major role in preventing their overuse. Furthermore, antibiotic consumption for non-therapeutic purposes (particularly in aquaculture, poultry, swine, and other animal farms) is far higher than clinical purposes and can certainly be minimized in the favor of environmental health. Surveillance is the first step to establish the understanding of the current state and progression of resistance. A systematic and continuous surveillance network should be established to assess the trends of antibiotic resistance from the clinical, industrial, and agricultural settings. Regular monitoring of antibiotic resistance can contribute to disease diagnosis, treatment, and policy making. Although it is difficult to quantify the accurate uses of antibiotics, the information regarding their sales can suggest the trend of usage of different classes of antibiotics at regional and national level. Such antibiotic surveillance system can enforce the policy makers to restrict the inadequate usage of antibiotics in animals that are clinically important for humans. Recent and previous efforts on such surveillance have been directed towards the establishment of relationships between antibiotic residues and ARGs in aquatic and other environmental compartments. However, it is also important to develop a link between ARGs and ARB in order to identify human pathogens with antibiotic resistance. This approach will be more helpful in evaluating the health risk of antibiotic resistance driven by antibiotic contamination. The unprecedented increase in antibiotic consumption must be analyzed critically in light of rapidly proliferating antibiotic resistance even against last-resort antibiotics. Optimization of antibiotic use along with waste management strategies may help mitigate the risk of antibacterial resistance in aquatic environments. However, this global issue requires the development and implementation of novel strategies in the context of environmental safety and human health.

